The Project Gutenberg eBook of The old man's guide to health and
longer life, by John Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The old man's guide to health and longer life
       With rules for diet, exercise, and physic; for preserving a good
       constitution, and preventing disorders in a bad one

Author: John Hill

Release Date: February 12, 2023 [eBook #70024]

Language: English

Produced by: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S GUIDE TO HEALTH
AND LONGER LIFE ***





                            [Illustration]




                                  THE

                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                                  TO

                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE.

                            [Illustration]




                                  THE

                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                                   TO

                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE:

                             WITH RULES FOR

                      DIET, EXERCISE, and PHYSIC;

                                  FOR

                    Preserving a good CONSTITUTION,

                                  AND

                   Preventing DISORDERS in a bad one.


                           BY J. HILL, M. D.

                    MEMBER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY.


                           THE SIXTH EDITION,

                        CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.

                                LONDON:
              Printed for E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.

                              M.DCC.LXXI.




                                  THE

                           OLD MAN’s GUIDE.


Healthful old age is the most valuable period of human life: Experience
has rendered the antient more able than those who have seen less, and
felt less, to conduct themselves, and their descendants: and being
freed from the empire of the passions, they enjoy quiet.

Philosophy pretends to this condition; but age gives it truly: Whatever
our heirs may think, it is worth preserving; and in that sense I write
the present Treatise.

A hundred are cut off by disorders which a regular course of life might
prevent; for one who dies of age, or its unavoidable effects: Many fall
by accidents; to one who is fairly called away by nature. The purpose
of this Treatise is to direct the means, by which these accidents may
be avoided, and those disorders timely obviated.

Old mens diseases are hard to cure; but they are easy to prevent. It
must be a good natural fabric which has preserved itself so long; and
the same strength may keep it much longer well, under good regulation.

Moderate diet, and due exercise, are the best guardians of health in
all: but in the advanced period here considered there are two great
preservatives besides; these are Ease, and Cheerfulness: both are the
natural offspring of health; and they will continue the blessing to
which they owe their birth.

It may be expected, I should now say, at what period of Life the state
of it that we call aged, begins: but nature has herself left this
undeterminable. The weakness and infirmities of age come at different
years, in different constitutions: I could at this hour point out a
very young man of eighty-seven: and the purlieus of Covent-Garden
abound with very old men at seven-and-twenty: but to speak in general
terms, it may be said, that the period of Life, for which we are giving
rules and regulations, begins about fifty-eight; tho’ the greater
Infirmities of age do not advance till several years after.




                               CHAP. I.

          _How a person in Years is to know he is in Health._


It is allowed, we know so little of nothing, as of ourselves: it has
been said often of the mind; but it is not less true of the body.
Fancying we have certain diseases will sometimes bring them upon us:
and there is as great danger in forcing ourselves to believe, against
our feeling, that we are well; when we have some disorder.

To avoid both, let the elderly man read here, with a free mind. Let him
not suppose, because God has blessed him with long health, he is above
the reach of sickness; nor neglect the care which may conquer, in its
beginning, a disease that would in the end conquer him. Let him be as
ready to acknowledge real disorders; as careful to avoid imaginary.

Health consists in a good digestion of the food; and free circulation
of the blood. The appetite, and the condition of the stomach after
eating, will shew the first; and the latter may be known best by the
pulse.

That old person’s digestion is always good, who has a sharp but not
voracious appetite; and who feels no pain, nor sickness after food. To
preserve this, let him be content with somewhat less than he could eat
at every meal: to keep the stomach in order, do not overload it.

The best time to feel the pulse is in a morning: a little after getting
up; and before breakfast. It should be a rule never to omit this
examination. A constant and regular attention to the pulse will shew
its slightest variations; and when any such happen, let care be taken
of the health.

There are methods of counting the strokes by a watch; but ’tis idle and
mechanical: a repeated attention in the plain way is better.

A frequent examination will inform us what is the condition of our
pulse in health; and all deviations from this shew or threaten sickness.

While an old man feels his pulse regular, finds his digestion good,
and with a mind at ease can take his usual exercise freely, he may be
certain he is well. We shall tell him how to keep so: and when a fault
is seen in time, ’tis easily remedy’d.

If the pulse beat too quick and high, the diet must be lower; if too
slow, and weak, the food must be somewhat richer. This short direction
will prevent half the diseases of mankind.




                               CHAP. II.

         _The means to preserve a healthful state in old age._


The diseases of aged persons differ, according to their state of body,
and natural constitution: the corpulent, are in danger of asthmas; the
lean, of stranguries: both should be guarded against with extreme care;
but most the first, because many sudden deaths have happened from it,
that might have been prevented easily by a timely care.

That care, and all the necessary help, will be shewn in a separate
chapter on this disease. With respect to suppressions of urine, beside
all that has been written of Burdock root, I may add here, that if as
much had been known of its virtues but a little while ago, as is now
notorious, we might some years longer have enjoyed that excellent man
Peter Collinson. Mr. Josiah Soames, near dying the same way, was saved
by it.

Exercise has thro’ the younger part of life been very instrumental
in preserving health: when we grow old we cannot use so much; and we
must therefore be more careful in our food. That will go off well with
motion, which will overload when quiet: that will nourish while we walk
abroad; which, when we stay at home, breeds fevers.

We must not make a change of diet violently; for all sudden alterations
are dangerous. Our strength for exercise will leave us by degrees; and
we must reduce our nourishment accordingly.

Old men are least healthy in winter: therefore they should then be
most careful. They are colder than the young; and therefore cold more
affects them. They will perceive the cold has hurt them, when they find
the pulse weaker and slower than usual: and they must recover the new
damage, by more warmth of cloathing; and a somewhat richer diet.

If perspiration has been stop’d by the cold, and no other ill effect
follow, that will be seen by the urine being paler, and more in
quantity than usual. In this case let flannel be put on carefully: this
will soon restore the perspiration; and the urine will return to its
due colour, and quantity. And after that let the flannel be carefully
left off again.

Health consists in the evacuations having all their proper course and
quantity: and flannel will diminish one as much as it encreases another.

No disorder is more troublesome to old men than costiveness: and the
use of flannel unadvisedly will sometimes occasion this.

A careful attention to health is the only way to preserve it: and
many things are excellent when properly used; which may otherwise be
destructive.

If the appetite fail; or wind oppress the stomach after meals; then
take more air, and exercise; and read or study less. Much study always
hurts digestion.

The different seasons affect persons in years very greatly, and they
should always be prepared for the changes. The old man is always best
in summer, and grows more spirited and free from his complaints as
that period advances toward autumn: winter we have said hurts age, for
age is cold and dry; and for that very reason youth feel summer most
hurtfully, and are best in winter.




                              CHAP. III.

              _Of the fittest diet for persons in years._


Light diet is most proper for aged persons.

Beef and pork should be avoided: for the stomach will rarely be able to
digest these, when it is not assisted by good exercise.

Lamb, veal, pig, chickens, rabbets, and fish, are excellent; and out
of these, if there were no others, a tolerable management may produce
sufficient variety.

No aged person should eat more than one considerable meal of solid food
in the day. The stomach will manage a dinner when breakfast and supper
have been light: otherwise the load of one meal not being gone off
before another is brought in, neither will be digested.

Dinner should not be eaten too early; that the appetite may not be
violent for supper: The older we grow, the more our food should be
diminished. This was the practice of Hippocrates; and by the observance
of it, Cornaro lived to his extreme age.

With respect to supper, the lighter it is the better: though we do not
agree with those who advise the omitting that meal intirely. Moderation
is the rule of health. They were in the right who declared the mischief
of heavy suppers; but the poets have long since told us what sort of
people those are, who, in avoiding a fault, rush into its contrary.
There is a medium sure between a heavy supper, and emptiness; and that
is best. Let the old man eat liquids; and of all liquid diets, those
which are partly composed of milk are best for him.

The digestive faculties in an old man are weak; but milk is in a manner
ready digested. He wants an easy nourishment; and this affords it;
without loading the stomach, or oppressing it during the hours of rest.

Asses milk is most easy of digestion: a pint of that, with a small
toast, eaten two hours before bed-time, will be nourishing; and sit
easy on the stomach. The value of asses milk is its lightness: that of
the cow is richer and heavier. Those who use the latter in the country,
should mix it first with an equal quantity of soft water: in London
this care is unnecessary, those who sell milk do it for them.

There are many other methods in which milk is proper: milk pottage, and
thin rice milk, will give a change. But some farther pleasing variety
need not be denied. Weak broths of veal, chicken, and mutton, may be
eat occasionally; and Jellies honestly made at home, are proper, safe,
and wholesome.

These things will answer the two purposes of nourishing, and
moistening; for aged persons are naturally too dry.

The breakfast is not very important. Those who eat no supper are too
hungry in a morning; and the stomach being loaded with what they take
at that time, is the less able to digest a dinner. This is the reason
we advice old persons to eat suppers, of a right kind; these take off
the too keen edge of the morning’s appetite; and there will remain
just so much desire to eat, as will lead them to get a little into the
stomach without loading it.

Men may fast away their appetite; and their power of digestion goes
with it. The conduct of the appetite regulates the health; and this is
a point not enough regarded.

It is as essential not to keep the stomach empty, as it is not to
overload it. Wind is the consequence of emptiness; and this always
disturbs its office. It should be constantly kept at its due employment
in advanced periods of life; and this by small quantities of proper
food.

Therefore breakfasts are as necessary as suppers: only those who are
troubled with phlegm should eat less at this meal than others. A cup of
chocolate, not made too strong, is a good breakfast. Coffee I cannot
advise generally: but the exceptions against tea are in a great measure
groundless.

If an elderly person likes tea, he need not deny it to himself for
breakfast. Let him use the plain green sort of sixteen shillings a
pound, and make it well; taking care the water boils, and allowing so
much tea that it may be of sufficient strength, without standing too
long upon the leaves.

Let him drink three moderate cups, with a little sugar and a good deal
of milk; and take it neither too hot, nor mawkishly cool. Let him eat
with it a thin slice or two of good bread, with a little butter: and he
will find all this nourishing and excellent.

The virtues of tea thus drank are as considerable, as its bad
qualities when ill managed. In this manner, it strengthens the stomach,
and assists digestion: it keeps the body from emptiness, without
loading it: the appetite for dinner will be the better for it; and the
digestion will be also more perfect. Tea in this quantity is sufficient
also for the great purpose of diluting; and it refreshes the spirits
more than any other liquid.

The best drink at meals is malt liquor, not too strong: small ale is
better than table-beer; because it will keep to a due time for safe use.

Some wine is necessary to old men: and according to the constitution,
and former manner of life, more may be born by some without
inconvenience. Of all wines sack is the best, if it can be obtained
genuine; and the next best is mountain.

As occasion shall require, the supper foods here directed may be
used by way of dinner; and broths may even be necessary sometimes
for breakfast. When the stomach cannot digest solids, these liquid
nourishments should supply the place: and when more nourishing things
are wanted, a broth breakfast is excellent. Vipers are extolled, but
’tis an idle fancy: I have found, on repeated trials, broth of veal,
and chickens, is much better.




                               CHAP. IV.

             _Of the foods persons in years should avoid._


Every thing that is heavy, and hard of digestion, must be avoided. Tho’
vegetables may be thought innocent; too much of them will in some cases
prove hurtful: and there are certain kinds that should be let alone
entirely.

Carrots are to be avoided, no weak stomach can digest them: turnips are
innocent; and parsnips are nourishing.

Salads should be shunned: cabbage, and all its kinds, breed wind; but
asparagus is diuretic; and is excellent against that common old man’s
complaint, the gravel.

Bad cheese should be avoided; and there is nothing worse than eating
too much butter: but very fine Cheshire cheese; or the Parmezan in a
small quantity after other food, are not amiss.

All sharp-tasted things, whether in food or drink, are carefully to
be shunned. They cannot be neutral upon the stomach; and they are much
more likely to do harm than good.

Fruits of a due ripeness, are innocent; and much more good than this
may be said of them: unripe, they hurt the stomach, and often bring on
dangerous cholics.

Cucumbers weaken the digestion; and greatly prevent the natural and
necessary secretions.

The pine-apple, the most pleasant of all fruits, is one of the most
dangerous: its sharpness fleas the mouth; and we know what effect such
a thing must have upon the stomach and bowels, when weakened by age.
I have known it bring on bloody fluxes, which have been fatal. There
are several kinds of this fruit; somewhat differing in quality; and a
perfect degree of ripeness, in a great measure, takes off its worst
effects: but these are nice distinctions: he who is wise will judge as
he does of mushrooms: where many are dangerous; avoid all.

Beside rejecting things which are hurtful in themselves, those who are
advanced in years would be upon their guard against all such as they
are not accustomed to.

Particular constitutions will shew unforeseen aversions to peculiar
medicines; and it is the same in foods. Let him who knows what agrees
with him stick to it. Change is always wrong; and it may be hazardous:
and ’tis idle to run into the way of danger, where there is no
advantage.

All mixtures of food upon the stomach are bad: and there is not a
greater error in an old person than to eat of many dishes at one meal.
He must not deceive himself by arguing that they all are innocent: for
two things of known qualities will often, on mixing, produce a third
that is perfectly different from them both: and these are dangerous
trials in an aged person’s stomach.

Right management in these articles is nearly as important as a right
choice. A regularity of eating is the next care to the selecting proper
food; and fixing on a right quantity.




                               CHAP. V.

                     _Of air for elderly persons._


Nothing contributes more to health and long life than pure and good
air: but by pure we are not to understand bleak; nor are aged persons
at any time to chuse that kind.

It is strange so many should live to a great age in London, where the
air has neither of these characters; where we breathe smoke, and the
mixt stench of a thousand putrifying substances; which cannot evaporate
through the thick and foul atmosphere of the place.

But though none will question the superior excellence of a clear
country air, yet let not him who has attained to a healthy three-score
and ten in London, think of leaving it, as a way to continue his days
to a longer period. They say use is second nature. It really becomes
nature itself: and bad things, to which an old man has been very long
accustomed, are often better than sudden changes. It is well known,
that many who have reached an uncommon date of life, have perished at
last by a rash alteration in their food: and ’tis certain the air is
scarce of less consequence.

He who would extend the period, and encrease the healthy condition of
his days by a country air, should begin at an earlier time: when his
constitution can better bear the alteration.

In regard to a choice of air, the reason we declare against that which
is too bleak is plain; for bleak and cold are always found together.
Cold air chills the blood; and in old men we want rather to warm it.
This sharp air is natural at the tops of hills: and such situations all
old men should avoid.

On the contrary, the mildest air of the country is that of vallies;
sheltered by rising grounds: but this is usually damp; and more
mischief may therefore arise from it than good.

The choice rests solely then upon a gentle ascent: the best place of
all is toward the bottom of a piece of ground, which does not in any
part rise to a very great height: and if there be a running water at
the lowest part, it is so far perfect.

More than this should be consulted for the country residence of the
aged man, or of any who would live to be aged. The soil is of vast
consequence; and so is the exposure. A clayey bottom must be avoided;
because it is always cold; and the air about it consequently raw,
and damp. Rains cannot get thro’ it, and they lodge till they are
evaporated; chilling the ground, and loading the air with their fatal
moisture.

A clean gravel is the best soil of all. The air over this is always
warm, and naturally dry; for rain soaks through it.

The north and north-east winds are the worst for old men: therefore let
them shelter themselves from these by a proper choice of situation. Let
the descent of the ground face the south-west; and then the natural
rise behind will keep off the bleak and sharp air from the opposite
quarters. This may be assisted also by plantations of trees: and thus
the true seat of health and pleasure may be established; so far as
these great points concern them.

He is happy who has made such a choice in time: and he’s still happier
who finds himself now in good time to make it. The later such a
residence is chosen, the more carefully and gradually must the owner
accustom himself to it: first in summer; and by degrees; and at times,
at other periods of the year. An air thus chosen, will then assist in
all the great articles of health which age wants; appetite, digestion,
and a free circulation.

Exercise will be easy; and it will be always pleasant in such a spot:
but let this also be under the regulation of good sense. Nothing is
better than walking; but let not the old man do himself more hurt, by a
rash and careless indulgence in this point, than it can do him service.

Let him never enjoy the air but when it is in a condition to do him
good; nor venture upon the ground but when it is fit for his feet.

No country house is without a garden; and the best part of this will be
a good smooth gravel walk. Let this be open to the south-west, and well
defended from the dangerous quarters. Let it be laid tolerably round,
that the water may not lodge; and let it be kept well rolled, hard, and
even.

In very favourable weather he may walk in pathways in the fields: but
in such as is not so fair, this garden-walk will be highly useful: but
let him never come upon it till the dew is off the grass; and let the
setting sun be the last object he sees there: even in the best weather.

The air of early morning and of late evening are both cold and
unwholesome; but some hours of the foremost part of the day, passed
constantly on such a walk, will add many years to life; and what is
much better, will give health with them.




                               CHAP. VI.

                      _Of exercise for old men._


Air has led us to mention already the first of exercises, which is
walking; and for those who have strength to indulge themselves in this,
there is none better: but feeble limbs, and various accidents, often
deny its use to those who most of all want motion.

In this case, riding on horseback is the next in excellence: and the
fittest hours of the day must be chosen for that, in the same manner
as for the other. In severe weather it will be necessary to ride under
shelter; and at all times to avoid damp or bleak places.