The Project Gutenberg eBook of The old man's guide to health and
longer life, by John Hill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The old man's guide to health and longer life
       With rules for diet, exercise, and physic; for preserving a good
       constitution, and preventing disorders in a bad one

Author: John Hill

Release Date: February 12, 2023 [eBook #70024]

Language: English

Produced by: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S GUIDE TO HEALTH
AND LONGER LIFE ***





                            [Illustration]




                                  THE

                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                                  TO

                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE.

                            [Illustration]




                                  THE

                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                                   TO

                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE:

                             WITH RULES FOR

                      DIET, EXERCISE, and PHYSIC;

                                  FOR

                    Preserving a good CONSTITUTION,

                                  AND

                   Preventing DISORDERS in a bad one.


                           BY J. HILL, M. D.

                    MEMBER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY.


                           THE SIXTH EDITION,

                        CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.

                                LONDON:
              Printed for E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.

                              M.DCC.LXXI.




                                  THE

                           OLD MAN’s GUIDE.


Healthful old age is the most valuable period of human life: Experience
has rendered the antient more able than those who have seen less, and
felt less, to conduct themselves, and their descendants: and being
freed from the empire of the passions, they enjoy quiet.

Philosophy pretends to this condition; but age gives it truly: Whatever
our heirs may think, it is worth preserving; and in that sense I write
the present Treatise.

A hundred are cut off by disorders which a regular course of life might
prevent; for one who dies of age, or its unavoidable effects: Many fall
by accidents; to one who is fairly called away by nature. The purpose
of this Treatise is to direct the means, by which these accidents may
be avoided, and those disorders timely obviated.

Old mens diseases are hard to cure; but they are easy to prevent. It
must be a good natural fabric which has preserved itself so long; and
the same strength may keep it much longer well, under good regulation.

Moderate diet, and due exercise, are the best guardians of health in
all: but in the advanced period here considered there are two great
preservatives besides; these are Ease, and Cheerfulness: both are the
natural offspring of health; and they will continue the blessing to
which they owe their birth.

It may be expected, I should now say, at what period of Life the state
of it that we call aged, begins: but nature has herself left this
undeterminable. The weakness and infirmities of age come at different
years, in different constitutions: I could at this hour point out a
very young man of eighty-seven: and the purlieus of Covent-Garden
abound with very old men at seven-and-twenty: but to speak in general
terms, it may be said, that the period of Life, for which we are giving
rules and regulations, begins about fifty-eight; tho’ the greater
Infirmities of age do not advance till several years after.




                               CHAP. I.

          _How a person in Years is to know he is in Health._


It is allowed, we know so little of nothing, as of ourselves: it has
been said often of the mind; but it is not less true of the body.
Fancying we have certain diseases will sometimes bring them upon us:
and there is as great danger in forcing ourselves to believe, against
our feeling, that we are well; when we have some disorder.

To avoid both, let the elderly man read here, with a free mind. Let him
not suppose, because God has blessed him with long health, he is above
the reach of sickness; nor neglect the care which may conquer, in its
beginning, a disease that would in the end conquer him. Let him be as
ready to acknowledge real disorders; as careful to avoid imaginary.

Health consists in a good digestion of the food; and free circulation
of the blood. The appetite, and the condition of the stomach after
eating, will shew the first; and the latter may be known best by the
pulse.

That old person’s digestion is always good, who has a sharp but not
voracious appetite; and who feels no pain, nor sickness after food. To
preserve this, let him be content with somewhat less than he could eat
at every meal: to keep the stomach in order, do not overload it.

The best time to feel the pulse is in a morning: a little after getting
up; and before breakfast. It should be a rule never to omit this
examination. A constant and regular attention to the pulse will shew
its slightest variations; and when any such happen, let care be taken
of the health.

There are methods of counting the strokes by a watch; but ’tis idle and
mechanical: a repeated attention in the plain way is better.

A frequent examination will inform us what is the condition of our
pulse in health; and all deviations from this shew or threaten sickness.

While an old man feels his pulse regular, finds his digestion good,
and with a mind at ease can take his usual exercise freely, he may be
certain he is well. We shall tell him how to keep so: and when a fault
is seen in time, ’tis easily remedy’d.

If the pulse beat too quick and high, the diet must be lower; if too
slow, and weak, the food must be somewhat richer. This short direction
will prevent half the diseases of mankind.




                               CHAP. II.

         _The means to preserve a healthful state in old age._


The diseases of aged persons differ, according to their state of body,
and natural constitution: the corpulent, are in danger of asthmas; the
lean, of stranguries: both should be guarded against with extreme care;
but most the first, because many sudden deaths have happened from it,
that might have been prevented easily by a timely care.

That care, and all the necessary help, will be shewn in a separate
chapter on this disease. With respect to suppressions of urine, beside
all that has been written of Burdock root, I may add here, that if as
much had been known of its virtues but a little while ago, as is now
notorious, we might some years longer have enjoyed that excellent man
Peter Collinson. Mr. Josiah Soames, near dying the same way, was saved
by it.

Exercise has thro’ the younger part of life been very instrumental
in preserving health: when we grow old we cannot use so much; and we
must therefore be more careful in our food. That will go off well with
motion, which will overload when quiet: that will nourish while we walk
abroad; which, when we stay at home, breeds fevers.

We must not make a change of diet violently; for all sudden alterations
are dangerous. Our strength for exercise will leave us by degrees; and
we must reduce our nourishment accordingly.

Old men are least healthy in winter: therefore they should then be
most careful. They are colder than the young; and therefore cold more
affects them. They will perceive the cold has hurt them, when they find
the pulse weaker and slower than usual: and they must recover the new
damage, by more warmth of cloathing; and a somewhat richer diet.

If perspiration has been stop’d by the cold, and no other ill effect
follow, that will be seen by the urine being paler, and more in
quantity than usual. In this case let flannel be put on carefully: this
will soon restore the perspiration; and the urine will return to its
due colour, and quantity. And after that let the flannel be carefully
left off again.

Health consists in the evacuations having all their proper course and
quantity: and flannel will diminish one as much as it encreases another.

No disorder is more troublesome to old men than costiveness: and the
use of flannel unadvisedly will sometimes occasion this.

A careful attention to health is the only way to preserve it: and
many things are excellent when properly used; which may otherwise be
destructive.

If the appetite fail; or wind oppress the stomach after meals; then
take more air, and exercise; and read or study less. Much study always
hurts digestion.

The different seasons affect persons in years very greatly, and they
should always be prepared for the changes. The old man is always best
in summer, and grows more spirited and free from his complaints as
that period advances toward autumn: winter we have said hurts age, for
age is cold and dry; and for that very reason youth feel summer most
hurtfully, and are best in winter.




                              CHAP. III.

              _Of the fittest diet for persons in years._


Light diet is most proper for aged persons.

Beef and pork should be avoided: for the stomach will rarely be able to
digest these, when it is not assisted by good exercise.

Lamb, veal, pig, chickens, rabbets, and fish, are excellent; and out
of these, if there were no others, a tolerable management may produce
sufficient variety.

No aged person should eat more than one considerable meal of solid food
in the day. The stomach will manage a dinner when breakfast and supper
have been light: otherwise the load of one meal not being gone off
before another is brought in, neither will be digested.

Dinner should not be eaten too early; that the appetite may not be
violent for supper: The older we grow, the more our food should be
diminished. This was the practice of Hippocrates; and by the observance
of it, Cornaro lived to his extreme age.

With respect to supper, the lighter it is the better: though we do not
agree with those who advise the omitting that meal intirely. Moderation
is the rule of health. They were in the right who declared the mischief
of heavy suppers; but the poets have long since told us what sort of
people those are, who, in avoiding a fault, rush into its contrary.
There is a medium sure between a heavy supper, and emptiness; and that
is best. Let the old man eat liquids; and of all liquid diets, those
which are partly composed of milk are best for him.

The digestive faculties in an old man are weak; but milk is in a manner
ready digested. He wants an easy nourishment; and this affords it;
without loading the stomach, or oppressing it during the hours of rest.

Asses milk is most easy of digestion: a pint of that, with a small
toast, eaten two hours before bed-time, will be nourishing; and sit
easy on the stomach. The value of asses milk is its lightness: that of
the cow is richer and heavier. Those who use the latter in the country,
should mix it first with an equal quantity of soft water: in London
this care is unnecessary, those who sell milk do it for them.

There are many other methods in which milk is proper: milk pottage, and
thin rice milk, will give a change. But some farther pleasing variety
need not be denied. Weak broths of veal, chicken, and mutton, may be
eat occasionally; and Jellies honestly made at home, are proper, safe,
and wholesome.

These things will answer the two purposes of nourishing, and
moistening; for aged persons are naturally too dry.

The breakfast is not very important. Those who eat no supper are too
hungry in a morning; and the stomach being loaded with what they take
at that time, is the less able to digest a dinner. This is the reason
we advice old persons to eat suppers, of a right kind; these take off
the too keen edge of the morning’s appetite; and there will remain
just so much desire to eat, as will lead them to get a little into the
stomach without loading it.

Men may fast away their appetite; and their power of digestion goes
with it. The conduct of the appetite regulates the health; and this is
a point not enough regarded.

It is as essential not to keep the stomach empty, as it is not to
overload it. Wind is the consequence of emptiness; and this always
disturbs its office. It should be constantly kept at its due employment
in advanced periods of life; and this by small quantities of proper
food.

Therefore breakfasts are as necessary as suppers: only those who are
troubled with phlegm should eat less at this meal than others. A cup of
chocolate, not made too strong, is a good breakfast. Coffee I cannot
advise generally: but the exceptions against tea are in a great measure
groundless.

If an elderly person likes tea, he need not deny it to himself for
breakfast. Let him use the plain green sort of sixteen shillings a
pound, and make it well; taking care the water boils, and allowing so
much tea that it may be of sufficient strength, without standing too
long upon the leaves.

Let him drink three moderate cups, with a little sugar and a good deal
of milk; and take it neither too hot, nor mawkishly cool. Let him eat
with it a thin slice or two of good bread, with a little butter: and he
will find all this nourishing and excellent.

The virtues of tea thus drank are as considerable, as its bad
qualities when ill managed. In this manner, it strengthens the stomach,
and assists digestion: it keeps the body from emptiness, without
loading it: the appetite for dinner will be the better for it; and the
digestion will be also more perfect. Tea in this quantity is sufficient
also for the great purpose of diluting; and it refreshes the spirits
more than any other liquid.

The best drink at meals is malt liquor, not too strong: small ale is
better than table-beer; because it will keep to a due time for safe use.

Some wine is necessary to old men: and according to the constitution,
and former manner of life, more may be born by some without
inconvenience. Of all wines sack is the best, if it can be obtained
genuine; and the next best is mountain.

As occasion shall require, the supper foods here directed may be
used by way of dinner; and broths may even be necessary sometimes
for breakfast. When the stomach cannot digest solids, these liquid
nourishments should supply the place: and when more nourishing things
are wanted, a broth breakfast is excellent. Vipers are extolled, but
’tis an idle fancy: I have found, on repeated trials, broth of veal,
and chickens, is much better.




                               CHAP. IV.

             _Of the foods persons in years should avoid._


Every thing that is heavy, and hard of digestion, must be avoided. Tho’
vegetables may be thought innocent; too much of them will in some cases
prove hurtful: and there are certain kinds that should be let alone
entirely.

Carrots are to be avoided, no weak stomach can digest them: turnips are
innocent; and parsnips are nourishing.

Salads should be shunned: cabbage, and all its kinds, breed wind; but
asparagus is diuretic; and is excellent against that common old man’s
complaint, the gravel.

Bad cheese should be avoided; and there is nothing worse than eating
too much butter: but very fine Cheshire cheese; or the Parmezan in a
small quantity after other food, are not amiss.

All sharp-tasted things, whether in food or drink, are carefully to
be shunned. They cannot be neutral upon the stomach; and they are much
more likely to do harm than good.

Fruits of a due ripeness, are innocent; and much more good than this
may be said of them: unripe, they hurt the stomach, and often bring on
dangerous cholics.

Cucumbers weaken the digestion; and greatly prevent the natural and
necessary secretions.

The pine-apple, the most pleasant of all fruits, is one of the most
dangerous: its sharpness fleas the mouth; and we know what effect such
a thing must have upon the stomach and bowels, when weakened by age.
I have known it bring on bloody fluxes, which have been fatal. There
are several kinds of this fruit; somewhat differing in quality; and a
perfect degree of ripeness, in a great measure, takes off its worst
effects: but these are nice distinctions: he who is wise will judge as
he does of mushrooms: where many are dangerous; avoid all.

Beside rejecting things which are hurtful in themselves, those who are
advanced in years would be upon their guard against all such as they
are not accustomed to.

Particular constitutions will shew unforeseen aversions to peculiar
medicines; and it is the same in foods. Let him who knows what agrees
with him stick to it. Change is always wrong; and it may be hazardous:
and ’tis idle to run into the way of danger, where there is no
advantage.

All mixtures of food upon the stomach are bad: and there is not a
greater error in an old person than to eat of many dishes at one meal.
He must not deceive himself by arguing that they all are innocent: for
two things of known qualities will often, on mixing, produce a third
that is perfectly different from them both: and these are dangerous
trials in an aged person’s stomach.

Right management in these articles is nearly as important as a right
choice. A regularity of eating is the next care to the selecting proper
food; and fixing on a right quantity.




                               CHAP. V.

                     _Of air for elderly persons._


Nothing contributes more to health and long life than pure and good
air: but by pure we are not to understand bleak; nor are aged persons
at any time to chuse that kind.

It is strange so many should live to a great age in London, where the
air has neither of these characters; where we breathe smoke, and the
mixt stench of a thousand putrifying substances; which cannot evaporate
through the thick and foul atmosphere of the place.

But though none will question the superior excellence of a clear
country air, yet let not him who has attained to a healthy three-score
and ten in London, think of leaving it, as a way to continue his days
to a longer period. They say use is second nature. It really becomes
nature itself: and bad things, to which an old man has been very long
accustomed, are often better than sudden changes. It is well known,
that many who have reached an uncommon date of life, have perished at
last by a rash alteration in their food: and ’tis certain the air is
scarce of less consequence.

He who would extend the period, and encrease the healthy condition of
his days by a country air, should begin at an earlier time: when his
constitution can better bear the alteration.

In regard to a choice of air, the reason we declare against that which
is too bleak is plain; for bleak and cold are always found together.
Cold air chills the blood; and in old men we want rather to warm it.
This sharp air is natural at the tops of hills: and such situations all
old men should avoid.

On the contrary, the mildest air of the country is that of vallies;
sheltered by rising grounds: but this is usually damp; and more
mischief may therefore arise from it than good.

The choice rests solely then upon a gentle ascent: the best place of
all is toward the bottom of a piece of ground, which does not in any
part rise to a very great height: and if there be a running water at
the lowest part, it is so far perfect.

More than this should be consulted for the country residence of the
aged man, or of any who would live to be aged. The soil is of vast
consequence; and so is the exposure. A clayey bottom must be avoided;
because it is always cold; and the air about it consequently raw,
and damp. Rains cannot get thro’ it, and they lodge till they are
evaporated; chilling the ground, and loading the air with their fatal
moisture.

A clean gravel is the best soil of all. The air over this is always
warm, and naturally dry; for rain soaks through it.

The north and north-east winds are the worst for old men: therefore let
them shelter themselves from these by a proper choice of situation. Let
the descent of the ground face the south-west; and then the natural
rise behind will keep off the bleak and sharp air from the opposite
quarters. This may be assisted also by plantations of trees: and thus
the true seat of health and pleasure may be established; so far as
these great points concern them.

He is happy who has made such a choice in time: and he’s still happier
who finds himself now in good time to make it. The later such a
residence is chosen, the more carefully and gradually must the owner
accustom himself to it: first in summer; and by degrees; and at times,
at other periods of the year. An air thus chosen, will then assist in
all the great articles of health which age wants; appetite, digestion,
and a free circulation.

Exercise will be easy; and it will be always pleasant in such a spot:
but let this also be under the regulation of good sense. Nothing is
better than walking; but let not the old man do himself more hurt, by a
rash and careless indulgence in this point, than it can do him service.

Let him never enjoy the air but when it is in a condition to do him
good; nor venture upon the ground but when it is fit for his feet.

No country house is without a garden; and the best part of this will be
a good smooth gravel walk. Let this be open to the south-west, and well
defended from the dangerous quarters. Let it be laid tolerably round,
that the water may not lodge; and let it be kept well rolled, hard, and
even.

In very favourable weather he may walk in pathways in the fields: but
in such as is not so fair, this garden-walk will be highly useful: but
let him never come upon it till the dew is off the grass; and let the
setting sun be the last object he sees there: even in the best weather.

The air of early morning and of late evening are both cold and
unwholesome; but some hours of the foremost part of the day, passed
constantly on such a walk, will add many years to life; and what is
much better, will give health with them.




                               CHAP. VI.

                      _Of exercise for old men._


Air has led us to mention already the first of exercises, which is
walking; and for those who have strength to indulge themselves in this,
there is none better: but feeble limbs, and various accidents, often
deny its use to those who most of all want motion.

In this case, riding on horseback is the next in excellence: and the
fittest hours of the day must be chosen for that, in the same manner
as for the other. In severe weather it will be necessary to ride under
shelter; and at all times to avoid damp or bleak places.

Many diversions afford also excellent exercise: bowling is one: but the
same care must be taken, that this be done at a proper time.

A chariot may supply the place of a horse, to such as are more feeble;
and for those who are so weak as to find even this too much, there will
arise a great deal of good from being driven along in those chairs
which are made to run upon gravel walks.

To such as are fond of gardening, nothing affords so happy, or so
constant exercise. We do not mean that they should dig, or weed the
ground: but to use such employment as will give exercise without
labour; and such as no hand will so well perform as that of the master.

Such are the trimming of shrubs, and flowering plants; the management
of espaliers, the removal of seedling flower-roots; the thinning of
fruit upon the trees; and the following and overlooking the other
several works. Here will at least be more, and brisker walking than
would be otherwise; and in many things the little use that is made
of the hands will complete that exercise, by continuing it perfectly
through the body.

The only danger in this healthy and happy course, is, that it is too
alluring. Let him who delights in it take an invariable resolution,
never to let his fondness for the garden carry him out too early; or
keep him there too late.




                              CHAP. VII.

                    _Of succedaneums for exercise._


The benefit of exercise all know; but all cannot enjoy it: nor can
it be had at all times. The very weather will some days deny the use
of those kinds we have named to such as are most able to take them.
In this case, any bustling about within doors, whether in the way
of business, or amusement, will in some degree answer the purpose.
The adjusting an escritoire; or the new arranging the volumes in a
book-case, have often produced this good effect: and billiards, or
other entertainments which afford the means of stirring within the
house, all answer the same purpose.

To those who are too weak for exercise, even the mildest, and in the
best weather, the great relief is a flesh-brush; and the effects
of this, when used with care and constancy, are more than can be
imagined. We know what we expect from exercise; and in old men,
the greatest of its advantages is the assisting circulation. The
flesh-brush does this nearly in as great a degree, excepting only for
the immediate time: but to have the full benefit, it must be regularly
and frequently repeated.

Another excellent succedaneum for exercise is washing the body with
warm water, and then rubbing it very well with repeated dry cloths.
This has many peculiar advantages: the warmth assists perspiration; the
washing opens the pores; and the rubbing afterwards is nearly equal to
the effect of the flesh-brush. The warmth and moisture join also in
softening the skin, and rendering it supple: and this is a great point;
for all are apt to grow hard and dry with age.

Great care must be taken to avoid taking cold after this. The best time
for it is therefore evening, in a warm bedchamber; and the bed should
be ready immediately; that the person may go into it while he is yet
hot.

The hands and feet should have their full share in this washing and
rubbing; for the circulation is weakest there; and the pores most
liable to be stopped. The hot bath answers, in some degree, this
purpose; and will be spoken of hereafter: but that is rather to be used
as a remedy than a preservative; and we are here treating of aged men
in health.




                              CHAP. VIII.

           _Of a regulation of temper; and of the passions._


Without entering into the province of the moralist or preacher, we may
affirm here, that the passions demand great regard in preserving the
health of old men. The motion of the blood in circulation is greatly
affected and altered by them: and the nerves may suffer yet more. The
whole frame is disordered by violent passions: and I have often seen
diseases; and sometimes immediate death has been the consequence of
giving full scope to them.

Nothing in this world is worth the trouble and distress men bring upon
themselves by giving way to immoderate passions. Life is the greatest
blessing; and health the next; and these both suffer by that fond
indulgence.

That the circulation is disordered by passions, we know from the true
and certain indication of the pulse. In anger, it is violent and hard;
in grief, faint, and slow; terrors make it irregular; and shame impedes
its motions.

These are sure notices of a disordered circulation: and old men cannot
bear this, even for a time, without damage. The strength of youth
restores all to its former state, when the sudden gust is over: but age
is weak, and cannot. Philosophy teaches the governing our passions;
and that is true wisdom. The old man should love himself too well to
indulge them: it is not worth his while. Quiet and regularity of Life
in every respect are his business: and as he is past the fluttering
pleasures of youth, let him place himself above its troubles.

Good humour, and a happy satisfaction of mind, will give the aged many
years; and much happiness in them. Discontent and disturbance wear out
nature: but the quiet we advice, preserves her in good condition.

Of all passions let the old man avoid a foolish fondness for women.
This never will solicit him: for nature knows her own time; and the
appetite decays with the power: but if he will solicit that which he
cannot enjoy, he will disturb his constitution more than by any other
means whatever: and while he is shortening his life; and robbing the
poor remainder he allows, of peace; he will be only making himself the
ridicule of those who seem to favour his vain, and ineffectual desires.

In passionate people, what we blame as their fault, is often their
misfortune. Some indeed, from a tyrannical disposition, have fixed this
humour upon themselves by custom; with no other cause; but for one of
these, there are a hundred whose fury of temper is owing to a disorder
in their body.

We know madness is a disease: and violent passion is a temporary
madness. This also arises often from a redundance of humours; and
medicines will cure it.

Let the passionate old man consider, that he hurts himself more than
any body else, by his anger; and he will then wish to be cured of its
tyranny. Let him examine himself, whether it be a disorder of his
mind; and then his physician, whether it lie in the body. In the first
case the remedy is philosophy: but in the latter, a few medicines will
restore him to temper; to that temper on which his life and happiness
depend.

Let the hasty old man cool himself by physic and a low diet: and let
him who is melancholy and gloomy, banish the everlasting fear of death
by warmer foods, cordial medicines, and that best of cordials, wine.

These will drive away much more than the apprehension of death; they
will put off the reality: for melancholy would have sunk the feeble,
long before his time.

Of all states of the mind, a disturbed hurry of the spirits is most to
be avoided. The blood and the nerves are disordered by this much more
than by labour, or bodily motion; and they are much longer in coming
to themselves again. Labour ceases absolutely when ’tis over: but the
storms of the mind leave a swelling sea, which strength of body alone
can calm; and in age this strength is faint.

No disease is more mischievous to weak old persons than a purging: and
I have seen this brought on instantly by a fit of passion; or by a
fright. Medicines have attempted to relieve the patient in vain. That
flux which would have been stop’d, if natural, by a spoonful of chalk
julep, or a dose of diascordium, has in this case reduced the person
to a skeleton, and sunk him into the grave in spite of all help.

Why should the old man disturb his mind with anger? or what should he
dread? death is his great terror; and he is very absurd who brings that
on by lesser fears.

Joy, tho’ it be only a greater share of satisfaction, is, in a violent
or outrageous degree, as hurtful as the other passions: it hurries the
circulation vehemently and irregularly; it exhausts the spirits; and
when excessive it has often occasioned sudden death. It is a violence
of youth; it belongs to that period of life more properly: that can
bear it; and to that let us leave it. Let the old man be as the Quakers
in this point; always chearful but never merry.

Last let us caution also the aged man who would be happy, and would
live longer, to combat with all his power that dangerous enemy
covetousness. ’Tis known universally, and we have sacred attestation of
it, that too great carefulness brings age before its time; and in age
it brings death prematurely. The old are in no danger of extravagance;
and the care of heaping up for others, when it shortens their own life,
is more than any heir deserves.

Ease and good humour are the great ingredients of a happy life: and
the principal means of a long one. Our whole lesson extends but thus
much farther; that the old man love his life so well; and value so
little all the accidents which belong to it, that he do not give a vain
attention to a part, which may rob him of the whole.




                               CHAP. IX.

                        _Of sleep for old men._


Intemperance has now converted day to night in the course of the gay,
young world; but this needs not, nor should influence those in years.
Midnight entertainments are no part of the œconomy of their peaceful
lives; and therefore they may come nearer to the course of nature.

The degree of sleep is a material article: and the time of it not less.
The old man has been cautioned against the cold air of evenings; and we
may now add, that after a light and early supper, and an hour of social
conversation with his family and his neighbours, bed will be his best
place.

Sleep was intended to recruit nature, and to restore the wasted
spirits. This is necessary to all persons; but to the aged most;
because they can least bear the waste of them. The passions will
disturb all constitutions, but those of old men most of all. Sleep
composes these: therefore ’tis of excellent use to them: and they may
safely indulge in it longer than the young.

Six hours is as long as a person in the prime of life should sleep; but
in age, eight, or even ten, according to the peculiar constitution, may
be more proper.

The natural season of sleep is night; and let the old man therefore
go to bed in such time, that he may pass these hours of rest without
breaking in upon the morning. In general, the most healthful custom for
age, is to go to bed at ten; and rise at eight in the morning.

If the mind be hurry’d; or from any other cause the person finds he
cannot compose himself to rest soon after going to bed; or get so
much sleep during the night; let him still rise at the same time the
following day: and the next evening prepare himself thus for better
sleep: let him go into a warm bath; and indulge himself with a glass of
wine, beyond his ordinary allowance, a little before bed time. This
will take off his watchfulness; and he will sink into the most pleasing
slumber.

The contrary practice, that of lying in bed in the morning, to make up
for want of sleep at night, is every way extremely wrong. As nothing
refreshes like seasonable sleep, nothing weakens and dejects a person
more than indulging in bed in the day: there is also this farther ill
consequence from it, that the person is never sleepy, at the due time
of the succeeding evening; and thus what was at first an accident,
becomes by indulgence a custom; and is then the more difficult to be
conquer’d, and the more hurtful.

The old man who has observed a temperate diet; and has gone to bed
regularly at ten o’clock, will naturally wake towards eight. And when
he wakes let him get up. He will then be in spirits for the day. If on
the contrary he lies dosing, he will get into a weakening sweat. He
will then be low spirited during the whole following day; and waking
and watchful at night.

On these little circumstances do the health or sickness, the happiness
or uneasiness of old persons depend, in a very great measure. We often
do not perceive them, or we easily overlook them: let us be for the
future more careful. There is no pain in living regularly in old age;
and the consequence of it is certain; a longer life, and every day of
it more agreeable.




                               CHAP. X.

         _Of the particular faults in old mens constitutions._


I hope it will be easy, by the preceding and the following directions,
for any man of sense, not vers’d at all in physic, to know the state
of his own health precisely: and ’tis a most important knowledge.
Hippocrates, who knew physic better than all who have followed him,
declares it to be an easy science, tho’ it requires length of time
to learn it; and Boerhaave, the Hippocrates of our succeeding times,
lectur’d for ever publicly on the simplicity and ease of physic.
They perplex themselves who think it difficult: only let the plain
considerate man attend to what he feels, and believe what is here told
him will result from it; then he may keep his mind at peace, which is
a great ingredient in the health of the body: but this full credit is
necessary; for the origin of his disorders is often very distant from
their apparent effects.

Hitherto we have treated of the condition of persons advanced in years,
who are healthy: and the rules we have laid down are for preserving and
continuing that state: and he who observes them duly cannot well fail
of success.

We now shall consider the several more frequent faults of the
constitution at this period of life; and the diseases arising from them.

The old man may be so far his own doctor, as to amend the general
distemperature of his body; and often he may prevent those diseases:
but if he fall into them, whether by neglect of these cautions, or in
spite of their force, let him then call in a physician.

We can advise him how to preserve health when he has it; and how to
remedy general disorders, so as to prevent more particular ones; so far
as a due regimen may do that: but he is a very ill judge of the human
frame, who will pretend to remedy its diseases without a knowledge both
of its structure, and of the qualities of remedies: and he would be
a bad member of society who gave such advice to any. It were as easy
to teach some other art by writing; and as rational to attempt making
a watchmaker, or a shipbuilder, by a description of the tools. The
whole life of a physician, spent in attention and experience, hardly
qualifies him for the undertaking: how then should a few light words
give sufficient information?




                               CHAP. XI.

                       _Of a fulness of blood._


An overfulness of blood naturally brings on a redundance of the other
humours: for as they are separated from the blood, they naturally
encrease with it in quantity. The one or the other of these excesses
may, and naturally will, occasion disorders; much more both.

The old man may know when he has too much blood in his veins from these
plain symptoms: his pulse will be full and strong, and somewhat quicker
than it should; his complexion will be more florid; and his urine
higher coloured. The veins also will be swelled, and his breathing will
grow difficult.

The occasion of all this has probably been too high feeding, and too
little exercise; therefore the plain method to abate the symptoms, and
prevent the mischief which they threaten, is by more motion; and an
abstemious diet.

This is plainly the change which should be made: but it must not
be too sudden. We have observed before, that all hasty alterations
are dangerous: but as this is slowly, let it be also determinately
and regularly brought on. If therefore no disease be come on as yet
from the fulness, there will not any come during a gradual course
of emptying the vessels by this practice. Nature will be relieved
in a satisfactory manner; whereas she would have been too violently
disturbed by any sudden shock.

The first rule is to retrench one third part from the flesh eaten at
dinner, of whatever kind that be. We have advised the abstaining from
beef and pork, but in this case mutton should be also let alone, or
very rarely eaten; and the dinner being made solely of the tender and
young meats in this reduced quantity, the next care must be, that
these are always well and thoroughly dress’d. It is a fashion to eat
meat almost raw, and doctors have advis’d it; but they would be better
physicians for bears and wolves, than men.

Let the person rise an hour before his usual time in a morning; and
every day encrease the quantity of exercise a little; but great care
must be taken not to go out at improper hours, to endanger getting
cold. In getting rid of one evil, let us not run into another. This
fulness is a state in which diseases are most easily brought on, and
they will be most violent in it. Colds are most dangerous of all,
to people in this condition, and therefore are very carefully to be
avoided.

The pulse will shew whether or not this method reduces the redundance
of blood: if it do not take a visible effect in four days, it will
be proper to be blooded. After this the same regimen will probably
complete the business; and there will be no need for medicines.

But if all should fail, an addition of the warm bath every other day
will probably answer the purpose. In all old mens cases ’tis best to
avoid medicines, if it can be done with safety: for they disturb the
constitution; and the best guard of their health is quietness.




                              CHAP. XII.

                        _Of wasting and decay._


When old persons fall into this declining condition, it generally
carries them off: but many may be saved by timely care; to whom no
remedies will be of service after a first neglect. While the stomach is
able to digest any thing, there is hope of recovery: but when its power
is lost, both food and physic are poured down the throat in vain.

When an aged person perceives his flesh wasting, and his strength and
spirits failing; let him take good nourishment; and adapt it to the
condition of his stomach.

If it be too strong, or if he takes too much, the digestive faculty,
already impaired by general weakness, cannot manage it: and he will
hasten his death by such a conduct.

The rule is to eat only innocent, tho’ the most nourishing things,
and these only in moderate quantities: chicken, young lamb, and veal,
boiled down almost to a jelly, are the proper foods for dinner; but
even of these let him eat less than his appetite demands.

Two hours before dinner, let him take half a pint of chicken broth; and
as his stomach afterwards grows stronger, veal or mutton broth; and let
him take the same again one hour after his light dinner.

Let his breakfast be a yolk of an egg, beaten up with half a pint of
asses milk, and a quarter of an ounce of conserve of roses: and his
supper veal broth nearly boiled to a jelly.

Every afternoon let him take half a pint of asses milk alone: and
while all this is doing, let care be taken that there be no violent
evacuations. A purging would be destructive; and morning sweats are
very hurtful. Let him therefore rise early: and to complete the cure,
let him believe these methods will perform it. An easy mind will do
more than food and physic.

Quiet, good humour, and complacency of temper, will prevent half the
diseases of old people: and they will cure one half of the others.




                              CHAP. XIII.

                       _Against sharp humours._


The first sign of sharp humours, in the bodies of old persons, usually
is an uneasiness at the stomach; then comes on a want of appetite, with
sour belchings, wind, purgings, and defluxions; and last, thirst, and a
feverish disposition.

The fault lies originally in the stomach; and generally an irregular
diet has been the cause; particularly high sauces, bad wines, and spicy
foods. The first step to a cure is to abstain from all these; and life
depends upon it. For to aggravate those symptoms is to destroy the
constitution utterly. Incurable fevers; or fatal purgings, follow.

The best beginning is by a vomit; and after this the diet should be all
of the mild and cooling kind. Every morning let the person take two
spoonfuls of syrup of snails, made by bruising them with sugar, and
hanging them up in a flannel bag till the juice runs out. At meals,
let his drink be a tea, made of marshmallow and liquorice-root, with
one third part milk, drank just warm. If the skin grow yellow, or the
white of the eyes appear of that colour, a dose of rhubarb once in
three days will be needful. The best method of taking it is by chewing.

This is as much physic as we would have an aged man use in such a case:
the rest must be done by a proper regimen.

First let him regulate his passions. Violent anger will increase this
disorder more than the most improper foods. Let him also banish fear:
if he thinks himself in danger; he will bring it on.

He must never overload his stomach; nor must never suffer it to be
empty. Once in two hours he should constantly swallow something.
Jellies of hartshorn, truly made, are excellent; but they must be
prepared at home: for cheating is so easy, and the method with
hartshorn only is so tedious; that few who make them for sale will do
it honestly.

Often this mischief rises from a stoppage of perspiration in some part;
particularly in the feet. Then the business is to bring that evacuation
on again by additional warmth: by flannel socks and yarn stockings.
This will in many cases alone perform the cure; and in all others,
where such a stoppage of perspiration has been a part of the cause, it
will assist the other methods.

The pulse, which was at first too quick, will grow moderate as these
methods of relief take place; and this promises a cure. To complete it,
the patient must go to bed in time: and use moderate exercise in the
best hours of the day. He must eat no fat meats, drink little wine; and
avoid care and uneasiness of mind.

If he do not sleep well, he must take a small dose of syrup of
diacodium every night.

This method will probably restore him to health; and it must be
preserved with a due care afterwards; else relapses in this case are
frequent. A vomit once in six weeks, and a dose of rhubarb every ten
days, with a careful diet, will usually make this a very healthy
constitution.

The great care is taking the defect in time; for new disorders are
easily conquered; but long established ones are too obstinate for such
weak bodies.




                              CHAP. XIV.

                     _Of pains and inflammations._


It is proper to treat of these together, because they generally come
one with the other. We need not tell the old man when he is in pain:
but he must examine carefully whether there be inflammation with it.

This he will know to be the case by his pulse beating hard and quick;
and by high-coloured urine: his flesh also will be hotter than usual.
When pains come on without these symptoms, warmth in the part, and
patience, are the remedies: they must be considered as the lot of age,
and endured accordingly: but when other symptoms join with them, they
threaten dangerous consequences.

The first step in this case is bleeding: and this with abstinence from
all hot foods often performs the cure.

If this give no relief, the next day but one a vomit will be proper.
If the body be costive, that inflames all the symptoms; and if purges
be given, they increase the violent motion of the blood, and therefore
do more hurt than service. Cooling and oily glysters are the proper
method, and the only proper one; and they should be repeated regularly
every morning.

The diet must be light and cool: all solid foods should be omitted for
the first four or five days, and in their place asses milk should be
taken. Chicken broth and jellies must be the chief nourishment during
this period.

After this, as the disorder abates, the strength must be considered;
and by degrees the usual diet, such as is here recommended for healthy
old men, should be introduced. But this must be done gradually, and
with great caution: otherwise, a hidden change, from low to richer
diet, will certainly bring on the complaint again; with more and worse
inflammation.




                               CHAP. XV.

                             _Of fluxes._


Aged people bear a too costive habit much better than they do fluxes or
purgings: for they are easily weakened; and nothing does it more than
these discharges.

The great rule, in all the disorders of aged persons, is to take them
in time. A purging will be cured by proper diet, when it is regarded
early: otherwise medicines must be called in; and perhaps they will be
ineffectual.

The quantity of solid food must in this case be reduced: but it should
not be left off wholly. A drink should be made of burnt hartshorn and
comfry root, two ounces of each boiled in two quarts of water to three
pints, the liquor poured clear off, and drank warm with a little red
wine. This should be the common drink.

Rice-milk, with some cinnamon boiled in it, is excellent for breakfast;
and rice-pudding best of all things for supper; and this two hours
before bed-time. Sea-biscuit should on this occasion be eat instead of
bread; and the patient must use more than ordinary exercise, to promote
perspiration.




                              CHAP. XVI.

                      _Of the gravel and stone._


Old persons are very subject to obstructions in the urinary passages;
and often the various degrees of the gravel and stone follow. These
are disorders difficult of cure but they are easily prevented in most
constitutions.

Let those who are subject but to slight complaints of this kind avoid
wine; and supply its place by clear malt liquor, of a due strength.

Let the diet be cooling: and in regard to exercise, the great and
golden rule is moderation. Violent motion, or rest for a long time
together, are equally wrong. Let the patient walk, or ride out every
day at the proper hours; and when the weather does not permit that, let
him use the same exercise in his chamber.

When the fits come on, let him take manna and oil: this is an easy and
effectual medicine. Two ounces of manna should be dissolved in half a
pint of water, and six spoonfuls of salad oil added to it. A spoonful
of this taken every half hour will stay upon the stomach, asswage the
pain, stop the vomitings which usually attend these complaints; and at
the same time procure stools: and while it eases the cholicky pains, it
will give passage to the stone.

This is the course in the violence of a fit. When it is perceived
coming on, an infusion of BURDOCK ROOT slic’d, is the safest, best,
and most effectual remedy. Two ounces of the fresh root, with a pint
and half of boiling water poured on it, makes this infusion. The liquor
is to be strained off as soon as cold: and half a pint, a little warmed
again, with a quarter of a pint of milk, and sweetened with honey, is
to be taken every four hours.

This is the medicine lately published also for the gout; and which many
are now taking for that disease with very great success. The gout and
gravel are nearly ally’d, and it is not strange the same remedy is so
effectual also in this case. The wonder is, that a plant of so great
virtue, and so common, has been so long neglected by the practisers of
physic.

Of the gout it would be vain to treat here. ’Tis a peculiar subject,
and requires a larger compass than any single article can be allowed in
this work: and it has been considered separately in that treatise.




                              CHAP. XVII.

                            _Of weakness._


Old men must expect a decay of strength: and it would be as idle to
call it a disease, as it were vain to think of remedies. But, besides
this which is natural and necessary, weakness is sometimes accidental,
and it may then be remedied.

Great evacuations, intense study, violent passions, or a too low diet,
will sometimes bring it on before the natural time; and then a proper
care and regimen may in a great measure remove it.

A weakness of the pulse, feebleness of the limbs, a paleness of the
face, waste of flesh, and low spirits, are the symptoms by which this
is known: the remedies are cordial medicines, and a somewhat richer
diet.

The medicine I have found most effectual is this: a quarter of an ounce
of saffron, a dram of cinnamon, and an ounce of confection of alkermes,
put into a quart of white wine: when this has stood two days it should
be poured off, and half a wine-glass of it drank once a day.

Rest of mind and body are also in this case very essential articles
toward the cure. Let not the patient think he is in danger: let him
venture to eat somewhat richer meats, but in a moderate quantity: and
indulge in one extraordinary glass of wine at every meal.

Let him rise early: but not go out ’till the air is well warmed by
the sun; and the dews are dispersed. If he resides in London at the
time, let him immediately go into the country: if he be too loose in
his bowels, let him check it moderately by the means we have before
directed; and let his malt liquor be strong of the hop.

Between breakfast and dinner let him every day take a yolk of a new
laid egg, beat up in a glass of strong white wine. The company of
agreeable friends will be the best medicine in an evening: and good
broth his fittest supper.




                             CHAP. XVIII.

                            _Of an asthma._


This is a common complaint with aged persons; and there is none more
troublesome. ’Tis difficult of cure; but some relief is easy: and
that will depend as much on the place as on all other considerations
together.

The great care in this respect is that the air of his residence be
neither thick nor damp.

The smoke of London is very bad; and the ill smells from many of the
trades carried on there are likewise hurtful. No person subject to an
asthma should live near tanners in the country, nor tallow chandlers,
or the like offensive trades, in London.

Exercise at proper times is highly beneficial in this case. Walking or
riding before dinner and supper are particularly useful.

Frequent washing the feet in warm water, and good rubbing with dry
cloths afterwards, is also highly serviceable.

All cold and viscous foods must be avoided. The stomach must not be
suffered to be empty, nor must it be loaded. The food should be of
the richest kind that can be proper for persons advanced in years;
and to assist digestion, two or three dishes of good green tea, made
carefully and taken with little sugar and without milk, should be drank
constantly, two hours and a half after dinner.

Vegetables must be avoided: and one great caution should be, not to
drink too much of any liquor whatsoever.

Bleeding is usually necessary; and the condition of the blood will shew
whether it should be in larger or smaller quantity; and whether or not
it will require to be soon repeated.

If the blood be sizey, several bleedings will probably be wanted;
and the same condition of it shews that the body can spare those
quantities. It shews also, that without these bleedings medicines can
take no effect.

After all this, the greatest preservative against sharp or repeated
fits is the famous gum ammoniacum. A quarter of an ounce of this being
dissolved in half a pint of water, two spoonfuls should be taken,
according to the symptoms, every night, or every second or third night.

This method will prevent many fits, and abate the severity of those
which cannot be avoided.

Thus the old man, even against the fury of this worst disturbance
of his life, as well as all the rest, may live happy: and he ought
to value that happiness the more, because he will owe it to his own
discretion.




                 ARTICLES considered in this PAMPHLET.


  Air, Page 20

  Asthma, 52


  Blood, fulness of, 38


  Constitutions, faulty, 36


  Decay, 41

  Diet, 12


  Exercise, 24


  Fluxes, 47

  Food, 12

  Foods to be avoided, 17

  Fulness of blood, 38


  Gravel, 48


  Health, 7

  Health, to preserve, 9

  Humours, 43


  Inflammations, 46


  Pains, 46

  Passions, 28


  Situation, 20

  Sleep, 33

  Sharp humours, 43

  Stone, 48


  Temper, 28


  Wasting, 41

  Weakness, 50


                                FINIS.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S GUIDE TO HEALTH
AND LONGER LIFE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
