most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
using this eBook.

Language: English



                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE


                                   TO

                    Preserving a good CONSTITUTION,





has rendered the antient more able than those who have seen less, and
our heirs may think, it is worth preserving; and in that sense I write
by accidents; to one who is fairly called away by nature. The purpose
must be a good natural fabric which has preserved itself so long; and
preservatives besides; these are Ease, and Cheerfulness: both are the
of it that we call aged, begins: but nature has herself left this
terms, it may be said, that the period of Life, for which we are giving


and there is as great danger in forcing ourselves to believe, against
the reach of sickness; nor neglect the care which may conquer, in its
of the blood. The appetite, and the condition of the stomach after
voracious appetite; and who feels no pain, nor sickness after food. To
up; and before breakfast. It should be a rule never to omit this
There are methods of counting the strokes by a watch; but ’tis idle and



         _The means to preserve a healthful state in old age._
lean, of stranguries: both should be guarded against with extreme care;
chapter on this disease. With respect to suppressions of urine, beside
by it.
motion, which will overload when quiet: that will nourish while we walk
we must reduce our nourishment accordingly.
the pulse weaker and slower than usual: and they must recover the new
quantity than usual. In this case let flannel be put on carefully: this
Health consists in the evacuations having all their proper course and

If the appetite fail; or wind oppress the stomach after meals; then
should always be prepared for the changes. The old man is always best



of these, if there were no others, a tolerable management may produce
have been light: otherwise the load of one meal not being gone off
diminished. This was the practice of Hippocrates; and by the observance
is the rule of health. They were in the right who declared the mischief
which are partly composed of milk are best for him.

should mix it first with an equal quantity of soft water: in London
need not be denied. Weak broths of veal, chicken, and mutton, may be
moistening; for aged persons are naturally too dry.
we advice old persons to eat suppers, of a right kind; these take off
Men may fast away their appetite; and their power of digestion goes
overload it. Wind is the consequence of emptiness; and this always
Therefore breakfasts are as necessary as suppers: only those who are

long upon the leaves.
will find all this nourishing and excellent.
loading it: the appetite for dinner will be the better for it; and the
The best drink at meals is malt liquor, not too strong: small ale is
inconvenience. Of all wines sack is the best, if it can be obtained
for breakfast. When the stomach cannot digest solids, these liquid


vegetables may be thought innocent; too much of them will in some cases
innocent; and parsnips are nourishing.

All sharp-tasted things, whether in food or drink, are carefully to
may be said of them: unripe, they hurt the stomach, and often bring on

are several kinds of this fruit; somewhat differing in quality; and a
Beside rejecting things which are hurtful in themselves, those who are
medicines; and it is the same in foods. Let him who knows what agrees
All mixtures of food upon the stomach are bad: and there is not a
trials in an aged person’s stomach.


air: but by pure we are not to understand bleak; nor are aged persons
mixt stench of a thousand putrifying substances; which cannot evaporate
and ten in London, think of leaving it, as a way to continue his days
last by a rash alteration in their food: and ’tis certain the air is
constitution can better bear the alteration.
This sharp air is natural at the tops of hills: and such situations all
mischief may therefore arise from it than good.
the lowest part, it is so far perfect.
because it is always cold; and the air about it consequently raw,
A clean gravel is the best soil of all. The air over this is always
the descent of the ground face the south-west; and then the natural

at other periods of the year. An air thus chosen, will then assist in
but let this also be under the regulation of good sense. Nothing is
good; nor venture upon the ground but when it is fit for his feet.
that the water may not lodge; and let it be kept well rolled, hard, and
let him never come upon it till the dew is off the grass; and let the
constantly on such a walk, will add many years to life; and what is



