The Project Gutenberg eBook of The old man's guide to health and
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms

Author: John Hill

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S GUIDE TO HEALTH



                            [Illustration]
                                  THE

                      DIET, EXERCISE, and PHYSIC;



                                LONDON:

                           OLD MAN’s GUIDE.
felt less, to conduct themselves, and their descendants: and being
the present Treatise.
of this Treatise is to direct the means, by which these accidents may
the same strength may keep it much longer well, under good regulation.
natural offspring of health; and they will continue the blessing to
undeterminable. The weakness and infirmities of age come at different
rules and regulations, begins about fifty-eight; tho’ the greater


our feeling, that we are well; when we have some disorder.
beginning, a disease that would in the end conquer him. Let him be as
eating, will shew the first; and the latter may be known best by the
preserve this, let him be content with somewhat less than he could eat
examination. A constant and regular attention to the pulse will shew
mechanical: a repeated attention in the plain way is better.
While an old man feels his pulse regular, finds his digestion good,
If the pulse beat too quick and high, the diet must be lower; if too


but most the first, because many sudden deaths have happened from it,
all that has been written of Burdock root, I may add here, that if as

abroad; which, when we stay at home, breeds fevers.

damage, by more warmth of cloathing; and a somewhat richer diet.
will soon restore the perspiration; and the urine will return to its
quantity: and flannel will diminish one as much as it encreases another.
A careful attention to health is the only way to preserve it: and
take more air, and exercise; and read or study less. Much study always
in summer, and grows more spirited and free from his complaints as

              _Of the fittest diet for persons in years._
Beef and pork should be avoided: for the stomach will rarely be able to
sufficient variety.
before another is brought in, neither will be digested.
of it, Cornaro lived to his extreme age.
of heavy suppers; but the poets have long since told us what sort of

Asses milk is most easy of digestion: a pint of that, with a small
this care is unnecessary, those who sell milk do it for them.
eat occasionally; and Jellies honestly made at home, are proper, safe,

the too keen edge of the morning’s appetite; and there will remain
with it. The conduct of the appetite regulates the health; and this is
disturbs its office. It should be constantly kept at its due employment
troubled with phlegm should eat less at this meal than others. A cup of
If an elderly person likes tea, he need not deny it to himself for


digestion will be also more perfect. Tea in this quantity is sufficient
better than table-beer; because it will keep to a due time for safe use.
genuine; and the next best is mountain.
nourishments should supply the place: and when more nourishing things

             _Of the foods persons in years should avoid._
prove hurtful: and there are certain kinds that should be let alone

Bad cheese should be avoided; and there is nothing worse than eating
be shunned. They cannot be neutral upon the stomach; and they are much
dangerous cholics.
The pine-apple, the most pleasant of all fruits, is one of the most
perfect degree of ripeness, in a great measure, takes off its worst
advanced in years would be upon their guard against all such as they
with him stick to it. Change is always wrong; and it may be hazardous:
greater error in an old person than to eat of many dishes at one meal.


                     _Of air for elderly persons._
at any time to chuse that kind.
through the thick and foul atmosphere of the place.
to a longer period. They say use is second nature. It really becomes
scarce of less consequence.

old men should avoid.


and damp. Rains cannot get thro’ it, and they lodge till they are
warm, and naturally dry; for rain soaks through it.
rise behind will keep off the bleak and sharp air from the opposite
He is happy who has made such a choice in time: and he’s still happier
all the great articles of health which age wants; appetite, digestion,
better than walking; but let not the old man do himself more hurt, by a

even.
setting sun be the last object he sees there: even in the best weather.
much better, will give health with them.
                               CHAP. VI.
Air has led us to mention already the first of exercises, which is
In this case, riding on horseback is the next in excellence: and the
