
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
Title: The old man's guide to health and longer life

Release Date: February 12, 2023 [eBook #70024]

             generously made available by The Internet Archive)
AND LONGER LIFE ***

                            [Illustration]


                                  TO


                                  THE

                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE:

                                  FOR

                   Preventing DISORDERS in a bad one.
                           BY J. HILL, M. D.


                                LONDON:
                              M.DCC.LXXI.



felt less, to conduct themselves, and their descendants: and being
Philosophy pretends to this condition; but age gives it truly: Whatever

by accidents; to one who is fairly called away by nature. The purpose

the same strength may keep it much longer well, under good regulation.
all: but in the advanced period here considered there are two great
which they owe their birth.
of it that we call aged, begins: but nature has herself left this
very young man of eighty-seven: and the purlieus of Covent-Garden
rules and regulations, begins about fifty-eight; tho’ the greater

                               CHAP. I.

been said often of the mind; but it is not less true of the body.
our feeling, that we are well; when we have some disorder.
not suppose, because God has blessed him with long health, he is above
ready to acknowledge real disorders; as careful to avoid imaginary.
of the blood. The appetite, and the condition of the stomach after

preserve this, let him be content with somewhat less than he could eat
The best time to feel the pulse is in a morning: a little after getting
its slightest variations; and when any such happen, let care be taken
There are methods of counting the strokes by a watch; but ’tis idle and
A frequent examination will inform us what is the condition of our
While an old man feels his pulse regular, finds his digestion good,
is seen in time, ’tis easily remedy’d.
slow, and weak, the food must be somewhat richer. This short direction

                               CHAP. II.

and natural constitution: the corpulent, are in danger of asthmas; the
that might have been prevented easily by a timely care.
chapter on this disease. With respect to suppressions of urine, beside
notorious, we might some years longer have enjoyed that excellent man

must therefore be more careful in our food. That will go off well with

we must reduce our nourishment accordingly.
most careful. They are colder than the young; and therefore cold more
damage, by more warmth of cloathing; and a somewhat richer diet.
follow, that will be seen by the urine being paler, and more in
due colour, and quantity. And after that let the flannel be carefully
Health consists in the evacuations having all their proper course and
No disorder is more troublesome to old men than costiveness: and the
A careful attention to health is the only way to preserve it: and

hurts digestion.
should always be prepared for the changes. The old man is always best
age is cold and dry; and for that very reason youth feel summer most

                              CHAP. III.



sufficient variety.
in the day. The stomach will manage a dinner when breakfast and supper

diminished. This was the practice of Hippocrates; and by the observance
With respect to supper, the lighter it is the better: though we do not
of heavy suppers; but the poets have long since told us what sort of
is best. Let the old man eat liquids; and of all liquid diets, those
The digestive faculties in an old man are weak; but milk is in a manner

easy on the stomach. The value of asses milk is its lightness: that of
this care is unnecessary, those who sell milk do it for them.
thin rice milk, will give a change. But some farther pleasing variety
and wholesome.
moistening; for aged persons are naturally too dry.
hungry in a morning; and the stomach being loaded with what they take
the too keen edge of the morning’s appetite; and there will remain

a point not enough regarded.
overload it. Wind is the consequence of emptiness; and this always
food.
troubled with phlegm should eat less at this meal than others. A cup of
groundless.
breakfast. Let him use the plain green sort of sixteen shillings a
long upon the leaves.
of milk; and take it neither too hot, nor mawkishly cool. Let him eat

and assists digestion: it keeps the body from emptiness, without
also for the great purpose of diluting; and it refreshes the spirits
The best drink at meals is malt liquor, not too strong: small ale is
Some wine is necessary to old men: and according to the constitution,
genuine; and the next best is mountain.
used by way of dinner; and broths may even be necessary sometimes
are wanted, a broth breakfast is excellent. Vipers are extolled, but


             _Of the foods persons in years should avoid._
Every thing that is heavy, and hard of digestion, must be avoided. Tho’
entirely.
innocent; and parsnips are nourishing.
asparagus is diuretic; and is excellent against that common old man’s
Bad cheese should be avoided; and there is nothing worse than eating

more likely to do harm than good.
may be said of them: unripe, they hurt the stomach, and often bring on
Cucumbers weaken the digestion; and greatly prevent the natural and
The pine-apple, the most pleasant of all fruits, is one of the most
I have known it bring on bloody fluxes, which have been fatal. There
effects: but these are nice distinctions: he who is wise will judge as
Beside rejecting things which are hurtful in themselves, those who are

with him stick to it. Change is always wrong; and it may be hazardous:

He must not deceive himself by arguing that they all are innocent: for
trials in an aged person’s stomach.
choice. A regularity of eating is the next care to the selecting proper

                               CHAP. V.

air: but by pure we are not to understand bleak; nor are aged persons
It is strange so many should live to a great age in London, where the
through the thick and foul atmosphere of the place.
country air, yet let not him who has attained to a healthy three-score
nature itself: and bad things, to which an old man has been very long
last by a rash alteration in their food: and ’tis certain the air is
He who would extend the period, and encrease the healthy condition of

Cold air chills the blood; and in old men we want rather to warm it.

mischief may therefore arise from it than good.
all is toward the bottom of a piece of ground, which does not in any

consequence; and so is the exposure. A clayey bottom must be avoided;
evaporated; chilling the ground, and loading the air with their fatal
A clean gravel is the best soil of all. The air over this is always
The north and north-east winds are the worst for old men: therefore let
rise behind will keep off the bleak and sharp air from the opposite
these great points concern them.
who finds himself now in good time to make it. The later such a
at other periods of the year. An air thus chosen, will then assist in

better than walking; but let not the old man do himself more hurt, by a
Let him never enjoy the air but when it is in a condition to do him
No country house is without a garden; and the best part of this will be
that the water may not lodge; and let it be kept well rolled, hard, and
In very favourable weather he may walk in pathways in the fields: but
setting sun be the last object he sees there: even in the best weather.
unwholesome; but some hours of the foremost part of the day, passed


                      _Of exercise for old men._
Air has led us to mention already the first of exercises, which is
deny its use to those who most of all want motion.
fittest hours of the day must be chosen for that, in the same manner


arise a great deal of good from being driven along in those chairs
To such as are fond of gardening, nothing affords so happy, or so
labour; and such as no hand will so well perform as that of the master.
of espaliers, the removal of seedling flower-roots; the thinning of
would be otherwise; and in many things the little use that is made

never to let his fondness for the garden carry him out too early; or

                              CHAP. VII.

it be had at all times. The very weather will some days deny the use
of business, or amusement, will in some degree answer the purpose.
other entertainments which afford the means of stirring within the
To those who are too weak for exercise, even the mildest, and in the
imagined. We know what we expect from exercise; and in old men,
the immediate time: but to have the full benefit, it must be regularly
Another excellent succedaneum for exercise is washing the body with
washing opens the pores; and the rubbing afterwards is nearly equal to
for all are apt to grow hard and dry with age.
for it is therefore evening, in a warm bedchamber; and the bed should

liable to be stopped. The hot bath answers, in some degree, this
in health.



health of old men. The motion of the blood in circulation is greatly
diseases; and sometimes immediate death has been the consequence of
Nothing in this world is worth the trouble and distress men bring upon
indulgence.
and certain indication of the pulse. In anger, it is violent and hard;

restores all to its former state, when the sudden gust is over: but age
indulge them: it is not worth his while. Quiet and regularity of Life

nature: but the quiet we advice, preserves her in good condition.
This never will solicit him: for nature knows her own time; and the
means whatever: and while he is shortening his life; and robbing the

humour upon themselves by custom; with no other cause; but for one of

medicines will cure it.
any body else, by his anger; and he will then wish to be cured of its
case the remedy is philosophy: but in the latter, a few medicines will

by warmer foods, cordial medicines, and that best of cordials, wine.
will put off the reality: for melancholy would have sunk the feeble,
Of all states of the mind, a disturbed hurry of the spirits is most to
to themselves again. Labour ceases absolutely when ’tis over: but the

fright. Medicines have attempted to relieve the patient in vain. That
to a skeleton, and sunk him into the grave in spite of all help.
dread? death is his great terror; and he is very absurd who brings that
Joy, tho’ it be only a greater share of satisfaction, is, in a violent
when excessive it has often occasioned sudden death. It is a violence
in this point; always chearful but never merry.
live longer, to combat with all his power that dangerous enemy
it brings death prematurely. The old are in no danger of extravagance;

much farther; that the old man love his life so well; and value so


                        _Of sleep for old men._
Intemperance has now converted day to night in the course of the gay,
lives; and therefore they may come nearer to the course of nature.
The old man has been cautioned against the cold air of evenings; and we
place.
spirits. This is necessary to all persons; but to the aged most;
composes these: therefore ’tis of excellent use to them: and they may
Six hours is as long as a person in the prime of life should sleep; but

breaking in upon the morning. In general, the most healthful custom for
If the mind be hurry’d; or from any other cause the person finds he
following day: and the next evening prepare himself thus for better
will take off his watchfulness; and he will sink into the most pleasing
The contrary practice, that of lying in bed in the morning, to make up
more than indulging in bed in the day: there is also this farther ill
becomes by indulgence a custom; and is then the more difficult to be
The old man who has observed a temperate diet; and has gone to bed
the contrary he lies dosing, he will get into a weakening sweat. He

do not perceive them, or we easily overlook them: let us be for the
it more agreeable.



of his own health precisely: and ’tis a most important knowledge.
to learn it; and Boerhaave, the Hippocrates of our succeeding times,
considerate man attend to what he feels, and believe what is here told
necessary; for the origin of his disorders is often very distant from
Hitherto we have treated of the condition of persons advanced in years,
of success.
constitution at this period of life; and the diseases arising from them.
distemperature of his body; and often he may prevent those diseases:

as a due regimen may do that: but he is a very ill judge of the human
a bad member of society who gave such advice to any. It were as easy
whole life of a physician, spent in attention and experience, hardly


                       _Of a fulness of blood._
An overfulness of blood naturally brings on a redundance of the other
may, and naturally will, occasion disorders; much more both.
plain symptoms: his pulse will be full and strong, and somewhat quicker
grow difficult.
little exercise; therefore the plain method to abate the symptoms, and

are dangerous: but as this is slowly, let it be also determinately
of emptying the vessels by this practice. Nature will be relieved

beef and pork, but in this case mutton should be also let alone, or
these are always well and thoroughly dress’d. It is a fashion to eat

must be taken not to go out at improper hours, to endanger getting
they will be most violent in it. Colds are most dangerous of all,

be proper to be blooded. After this the same regimen will probably
But if all should fail, an addition of the warm bath every other day
constitution; and the best guard of their health is quietness.



remedies will be of service after a first neglect. While the stomach is

condition of his stomach.
already impaired by general weakness, cannot manage it: and he will
The rule is to eat only innocent, tho’ the most nourishing things,
even of these let him eat less than his appetite demands.
as his stomach afterwards grows stronger, veal or mutton broth; and let
Let his breakfast be a yolk of an egg, beaten up with half a pint of

evacuations. A purging would be destructive; and morning sweats are
more than food and physic.
diseases of old people: and they will cure one half of the others.



sour belchings, wind, purgings, and defluxions; and last, thirst, and a
The fault lies originally in the stomach; and generally an irregular
depends upon it. For to aggravate those symptoms is to destroy the
The best beginning is by a vomit; and after this the diet should be all
hanging them up in a flannel bag till the juice runs out. At meals,
white of the eyes appear of that colour, a dose of rhubarb once in
This is as much physic as we would have an aged man use in such a case:
First let him regulate his passions. Violent anger will increase this

Jellies of hartshorn, truly made, are excellent; but they must be
it honestly.
particularly in the feet. Then the business is to bring that evacuation
where such a stoppage of perspiration has been a part of the cause, it
The pulse, which was at first too quick, will grow moderate as these
best hours of the day. He must eat no fat meats, drink little wine; and
If he do not sleep well, he must take a small dose of syrup of
This method will probably restore him to health; and it must be
days, with a careful diet, will usually make this a very healthy
The great care is taking the defect in time; for new disorders are


                     _Of pains and inflammations._
It is proper to treat of these together, because they generally come

When pains come on without these symptoms, warmth in the part, and
threaten dangerous consequences.
all hot foods often performs the cure.
If the body be costive, that inflames all the symptoms; and if purges
method, and the only proper one; and they should be repeated regularly
The diet must be light and cool: all solid foods should be omitted for
this period.
and by degrees the usual diet, such as is here recommended for healthy
diet, will certainly bring on the complaint again; with more and worse

                               CHAP. XV.

purgings: for they are easily weakened; and nothing does it more than
The great rule, in all the disorders of aged persons, is to take them
ineffectual.
not be left off wholly. A drink should be made of burnt hartshorn and
wine. This should be the common drink.
and rice-pudding best of all things for supper; and this two hours
perspiration.



are disorders difficult of cure but they are easily prevented in most
Let those who are subject but to slight complaints of this kind avoid
Let the diet be cooling: and in regard to exercise, the great and
day at the proper hours; and when the weather does not permit that, let
When the fits come on, let him take manna and oil: this is an easy and
of this taken every half hour will stay upon the stomach, asswage the
will give passage to the stone.
coming on, an infusion of BURDOCK ROOT slic’d, is the safest, best,
is to be strained off as soon as cold: and half a pint, a little warmed

gravel are nearly ally’d, and it is not strange the same remedy is so
physic.
and requires a larger compass than any single article can be allowed in

                              CHAP. XVII.

call it a disease, as it were vain to think of remedies. But, besides

care and regimen may in a great measure remove it.
face, waste of flesh, and low spirits, are the symptoms by which this

put into a quart of white wine: when this has stood two days it should
Rest of mind and body are also in this case very essential articles
indulge in one extraordinary glass of wine at every meal.
the sun; and the dews are dispersed. If he resides in London at the
directed; and let his malt liquor be strong of the hop.
laid egg, beat up in a glass of strong white wine. The company of


                            _Of an asthma._
This is a common complaint with aged persons; and there is none more
together.
neither thick nor damp.
trades carried on there are likewise hurtful. No person subject to an



the richest kind that can be proper for persons advanced in years;
constantly, two hours and a half after dinner.
drink too much of any liquor whatsoever.
whether it should be in larger or smaller quantity; and whether or not
If the blood be sizey, several bleedings will probably be wanted;
take no effect.
fits is the famous gum ammoniacum. A quarter of an ounce of this being


to value that happiness the more, because he will owe it to his own

                 ARTICLES considered in this PAMPHLET.
  Air, Page 20






  Food, 12



  Health, to preserve, 9




  Sleep, 33



  Weakness, 50
                                FINIS.
AND LONGER LIFE ***
be renamed.
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
START: FULL LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this

of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the

  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
Gutenberg™ License.
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Literary Archive Foundation.”
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue

  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
cannot be read by your equipment.
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR

receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
without further opportunities to fix the problem.
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO

damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or

providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
www.gutenberg.org
Archive Foundation
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary

to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
status with the IRS.
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition

outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
