longer life, by John Hill
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you

       constitution, and preventing disorders in a bad one

Language: English
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S GUIDE TO HEALTH



                                  THE

                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE.


                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                             WITH RULES FOR

                    Preserving a good CONSTITUTION,


                    MEMBER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY.
                           THE SIXTH EDITION,



                                  THE

has rendered the antient more able than those who have seen less, and

the present Treatise.
prevent; for one who dies of age, or its unavoidable effects: Many fall
be avoided, and those disorders timely obviated.
must be a good natural fabric which has preserved itself so long; and
Moderate diet, and due exercise, are the best guardians of health in
natural offspring of health; and they will continue the blessing to
It may be expected, I should now say, at what period of Life the state
years, in different constitutions: I could at this hour point out a
terms, it may be said, that the period of Life, for which we are giving


          _How a person in Years is to know he is in Health._
It is allowed, we know so little of nothing, as of ourselves: it has
and there is as great danger in forcing ourselves to believe, against
To avoid both, let the elderly man read here, with a free mind. Let him
beginning, a disease that would in the end conquer him. Let him be as
Health consists in a good digestion of the food; and free circulation
pulse.
voracious appetite; and who feels no pain, nor sickness after food. To

examination. A constant and regular attention to the pulse will shew



certain he is well. We shall tell him how to keep so: and when a fault
If the pulse beat too quick and high, the diet must be lower; if too


         _The means to preserve a healthful state in old age._
The diseases of aged persons differ, according to their state of body,
but most the first, because many sudden deaths have happened from it,
That care, and all the necessary help, will be shewn in a separate
much had been known of its virtues but a little while ago, as is now
by it.
in preserving health: when we grow old we cannot use so much; and we
abroad; which, when we stay at home, breeds fevers.
are dangerous. Our strength for exercise will leave us by degrees; and
Old men are least healthy in winter: therefore they should then be
the pulse weaker and slower than usual: and they must recover the new
If perspiration has been stop’d by the cold, and no other ill effect
will soon restore the perspiration; and the urine will return to its



destructive.
take more air, and exercise; and read or study less. Much study always
The different seasons affect persons in years very greatly, and they
that period advances toward autumn: winter we have said hurts age, for


              _Of the fittest diet for persons in years._
Light diet is most proper for aged persons.
digest these, when it is not assisted by good exercise.
of these, if there were no others, a tolerable management may produce
No aged person should eat more than one considerable meal of solid food
before another is brought in, neither will be digested.
violent for supper: The older we grow, the more our food should be

is the rule of health. They were in the right who declared the mischief
There is a medium sure between a heavy supper, and emptiness; and that

without loading the stomach, or oppressing it during the hours of rest.
toast, eaten two hours before bed-time, will be nourishing; and sit
should mix it first with an equal quantity of soft water: in London
There are many other methods in which milk is proper: milk pottage, and
eat occasionally; and Jellies honestly made at home, are proper, safe,
These things will answer the two purposes of nourishing, and
The breakfast is not very important. Those who eat no supper are too
we advice old persons to eat suppers, of a right kind; these take off
stomach without loading it.
with it. The conduct of the appetite regulates the health; and this is
It is as essential not to keep the stomach empty, as it is not to
in advanced periods of life; and this by small quantities of proper
Therefore breakfasts are as necessary as suppers: only those who are
advise generally: but the exceptions against tea are in a great measure
If an elderly person likes tea, he need not deny it to himself for
much tea that it may be of sufficient strength, without standing too
Let him drink three moderate cups, with a little sugar and a good deal
will find all this nourishing and excellent.
qualities when ill managed. In this manner, it strengthens the stomach,
digestion will be also more perfect. Tea in this quantity is sufficient


inconvenience. Of all wines sack is the best, if it can be obtained
As occasion shall require, the supper foods here directed may be
nourishments should supply the place: and when more nourishing things
and chickens, is much better.



prove hurtful: and there are certain kinds that should be let alone
Carrots are to be avoided, no weak stomach can digest them: turnips are
Salads should be shunned: cabbage, and all its kinds, breed wind; but

small quantity after other food, are not amiss.
be shunned. They cannot be neutral upon the stomach; and they are much
Fruits of a due ripeness, are innocent; and much more good than this


a thing must have upon the stomach and bowels, when weakened by age.
perfect degree of ripeness, in a great measure, takes off its worst

are not accustomed to.
medicines; and it is the same in foods. Let him who knows what agrees
advantage.
greater error in an old person than to eat of many dishes at one meal.
that is perfectly different from them both: and these are dangerous
Right management in these articles is nearly as important as a right


                     _Of air for elderly persons._
Nothing contributes more to health and long life than pure and good

mixt stench of a thousand putrifying substances; which cannot evaporate
But though none will question the superior excellence of a clear
to a longer period. They say use is second nature. It really becomes
that many who have reached an uncommon date of life, have perished at

constitution can better bear the alteration.
is too bleak is plain; for bleak and cold are always found together.
old men should avoid.
sheltered by rising grounds: but this is usually damp; and more
The choice rests solely then upon a gentle ascent: the best place of
the lowest part, it is so far perfect.
aged man, or of any who would live to be aged. The soil is of vast
and damp. Rains cannot get thro’ it, and they lodge till they are


the descent of the ground face the south-west; and then the natural
the true seat of health and pleasure may be established; so far as
He is happy who has made such a choice in time: and he’s still happier
accustom himself to it: first in summer; and by degrees; and at times,
and a free circulation.
but let this also be under the regulation of good sense. Nothing is


defended from the dangerous quarters. Let it be laid tolerably round,

let him never come upon it till the dew is off the grass; and let the
The air of early morning and of late evening are both cold and
much better, will give health with them.



there is none better: but feeble limbs, and various accidents, often
In this case, riding on horseback is the next in excellence: and the
shelter; and at all times to avoid damp or bleak places.
same care must be taken, that this be done at a proper time.
and for those who are so weak as to find even this too much, there will

ground: but to use such employment as will give exercise without
Such are the trimming of shrubs, and flowering plants; the management
several works. Here will at least be more, and brisker walking than
through the body.
alluring. Let him who delights in it take an invariable resolution,


                    _Of succedaneums for exercise._
The benefit of exercise all know; but all cannot enjoy it: nor can
In this case, any bustling about within doors, whether in the way
book-case, have often produced this good effect: and billiards, or

of this, when used with care and constancy, are more than can be
flesh-brush does this nearly in as great a degree, excepting only for

This has many peculiar advantages: the warmth assists perspiration; the
softening the skin, and rendering it supple: and this is a great point;
Great care must be taken to avoid taking cold after this. The best time
hot.
rubbing; for the circulation is weakest there; and the pores most
as a remedy than a preservative; and we are here treating of aged men

                              CHAP. VIII.

affirm here, that the passions demand great regard in preserving the
whole frame is disordered by violent passions: and I have often seen

blessing; and health the next; and these both suffer by that fond
That the circulation is disordered by passions, we know from the true
its motions.
bear this, even for a time, without damage. The strength of youth
and that is true wisdom. The old man should love himself too well to
pleasures of youth, let him place himself above its troubles.
years; and much happiness in them. Discontent and disturbance wear out
Of all passions let the old man avoid a foolish fondness for women.
cannot enjoy, he will disturb his constitution more than by any other
ridicule of those who seem to favour his vain, and ineffectual desires.
misfortune. Some indeed, from a tyrannical disposition, have fixed this
in their body.
madness. This also arises often from a redundance of humours; and
Let the passionate old man consider, that he hurts himself more than
mind; and then his physician, whether it lie in the body. In the first
depend.
him who is melancholy and gloomy, banish the everlasting fear of death
These will drive away much more than the apprehension of death; they

than by labour, or bodily motion; and they are much longer in coming
can calm; and in age this strength is faint.
I have seen this brought on instantly by a fit of passion; or by a
julep, or a dose of diascordium, has in this case reduced the person
Why should the old man disturb his mind with anger? or what should he

circulation vehemently and irregularly; it exhausts the spirits; and
bear it; and to that let us leave it. Let the old man be as the Quakers
Last let us caution also the aged man who would be happy, and would
it, that too great carefulness brings age before its time; and in age
is more than any heir deserves.
the principal means of a long one. Our whole lesson extends but thus
attention to a part, which may rob him of the whole.



Midnight entertainments are no part of the œconomy of their peaceful
The degree of sleep is a material article: and the time of it not less.
conversation with his family and his neighbours, bed will be his best
Sleep was intended to recruit nature, and to restore the wasted
disturb all constitutions, but those of old men most of all. Sleep

be more proper.
go to bed in such time, that he may pass these hours of rest without

much sleep during the night; let him still rise at the same time the
wine, beyond his ordinary allowance, a little before bed time. This

refreshes like seasonable sleep, nothing weakens and dejects a person
of the succeeding evening; and thus what was at first an accident,

he wakes let him get up. He will then be in spirits for the day. If on
and watchful at night.
or uneasiness of old persons depend, in a very great measure. We often
and the consequence of it is certain; a longer life, and every day of

                               CHAP. X.

for any man of sense, not vers’d at all in physic, to know the state
declares it to be an easy science, tho’ it requires length of time
They perplex themselves who think it difficult: only let the plain
a great ingredient in the health of the body: but this full credit is

continuing that state: and he who observes them duly cannot well fail
We now shall consider the several more frequent faults of the
The old man may be so far his own doctor, as to amend the general
spite of their force, let him then call in a physician.
remedy general disorders, so as to prevent more particular ones; so far
of its structure, and of the qualities of remedies: and he would be
a watchmaker, or a shipbuilder, by a description of the tools. The
give sufficient information?



encrease with it in quantity. The one or the other of these excesses
The old man may know when he has too much blood in his veins from these
higher coloured. The veins also will be swelled, and his breathing will
The occasion of all this has probably been too high feeding, and too
abstemious diet.
be too sudden. We have observed before, that all hasty alterations
from the fulness, there will not any come during a gradual course
disturbed by any sudden shock.
dinner, of whatever kind that be. We have advised the abstaining from
young meats in this reduced quantity, the next care must be, that
physicians for bears and wolves, than men.
every day encrease the quantity of exercise a little; but great care
fulness is a state in which diseases are most easily brought on, and
avoided.
of blood: if it do not take a visible effect in four days, it will

avoid medicines, if it can be done with safety: for they disturb the

                              CHAP. XII.

carries them off: but many may be saved by timely care; to whom no
is lost, both food and physic are poured down the throat in vain.
spirits failing; let him take good nourishment; and adapt it to the
If it be too strong, or if he takes too much, the digestive faculty,

boiled down almost to a jelly, are the proper foods for dinner; but
Two hours before dinner, let him take half a pint of chicken broth; and

supper veal broth nearly boiled to a jelly.
while all this is doing, let care be taken that there be no violent
let him believe these methods will perform it. An easy mind will do
Quiet, good humour, and complacency of temper, will prevent half the

                              CHAP. XIII.

is an uneasiness at the stomach; then comes on a want of appetite, with

foods. The first step to a cure is to abstain from all these; and life

spoonfuls of syrup of snails, made by bruising them with sugar, and
one third part milk, drank just warm. If the skin grow yellow, or the


if he thinks himself in danger; he will bring it on.
empty. Once in two hours he should constantly swallow something.
hartshorn only is so tedious; that few who make them for sale will do
Often this mischief rises from a stoppage of perspiration in some part;
This will in many cases alone perform the cure; and in all others,

the patient must go to bed in time: and use moderate exercise in the


frequent. A vomit once in six weeks, and a dose of rhubarb every ten

weak bodies.



but he must examine carefully whether there be inflammation with it.
and by high-coloured urine: his flesh also will be hotter than usual.
and endured accordingly: but when other symptoms join with them, they
The first step in this case is bleeding: and this with abstinence from
If this give no relief, the next day but one a vomit will be proper.
do more hurt than service. Cooling and oily glysters are the proper

taken. Chicken broth and jellies must be the chief nourishment during
After this, as the disorder abates, the strength must be considered;
with great caution: otherwise, a hidden change, from low to richer


                             _Of fluxes._
Aged people bear a too costive habit much better than they do fluxes or

early: otherwise medicines must be called in; and perhaps they will be
The quantity of solid food must in this case be reduced: but it should
pints, the liquor poured clear off, and drank warm with a little red
Rice-milk, with some cinnamon boiled in it, is excellent for breakfast;
bread; and the patient must use more than ordinary exercise, to promote

                              CHAP. XVI.

and often the various degrees of the gravel and stone follow. These


together, are equally wrong. Let the patient walk, or ride out every

pint of water, and six spoonfuls of salad oil added to it. A spoonful
the same time procure stools: and while it eases the cholicky pains, it
This is the course in the violence of a fit. When it is perceived
and half of boiling water poured on it, makes this infusion. The liquor
to be taken every four hours.
are now taking for that disease with very great success. The gout and
virtue, and so common, has been so long neglected by the practisers of
Of the gout it would be vain to treat here. ’Tis a peculiar subject,


                            _Of weakness._
Old men must expect a decay of strength: and it would be as idle to
and it may then be remedied.
will sometimes bring it on before the natural time; and then a proper
A weakness of the pulse, feebleness of the limbs, a paleness of the
diet.
of saffron, a dram of cinnamon, and an ounce of confection of alkermes,

venture to eat somewhat richer meats, but in a moderate quantity: and
Let him rise early: but not go out ’till the air is well warmed by
his bowels, let him check it moderately by the means we have before
Between breakfast and dinner let him every day take a yolk of a new
broth his fittest supper.



that will depend as much on the place as on all other considerations
The great care in this respect is that the air of his residence be
The smoke of London is very bad; and the ill smells from many of the
or the like offensive trades, in London.
riding before dinner and supper are particularly useful.
cloths afterwards, is also highly serviceable.
suffered to be empty, nor must it be loaded. The food should be of
carefully and taken with little sugar and without milk, should be drank
Vegetables must be avoided: and one great caution should be, not to
Bleeding is usually necessary; and the condition of the blood will shew

quantities. It shews also, that without these bleedings medicines can
After all this, the greatest preservative against sharp or repeated
according to the symptoms, every night, or every second or third night.
which cannot be avoided.
of his life, as well as all the rest, may live happy: and he ought



  Asthma, 52
  Blood, fulness of, 38
  Constitutions, faulty, 36
  Decay, 41



  Foods to be avoided, 17



  Humours, 43
  Inflammations, 46
  Pains, 46


  Sharp humours, 43




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD MAN'S GUIDE TO HEALTH
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
United States without permission and without paying copyright
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full


and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the

agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the

in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
country other than the United States.

prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the

contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
beginning of this work.
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

provided that:
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  works.
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the


are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
forth in Section 3 below.

works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
DAMAGE.
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
remaining provisions.
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
Defect you cause.

computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It

goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up


increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
approach us with offers to donate.
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and

the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not


Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
