The Project Gutenberg eBook of The old man's guide to health and
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
using this eBook.
       With rules for diet, exercise, and physic; for preserving a good
Author: John Hill

Produced by: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team





                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                            [Illustration]


                                   TO

                      DIET, EXERCISE, and PHYSIC;

                                  AND



                        CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.
              Printed for E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.


                           OLD MAN’s GUIDE.
Healthful old age is the most valuable period of human life: Experience
freed from the empire of the passions, they enjoy quiet.
our heirs may think, it is worth preserving; and in that sense I write
A hundred are cut off by disorders which a regular course of life might
of this Treatise is to direct the means, by which these accidents may
Old mens diseases are hard to cure; but they are easy to prevent. It

preservatives besides; these are Ease, and Cheerfulness: both are the

undeterminable. The weakness and infirmities of age come at different
abound with very old men at seven-and-twenty: but to speak in general
Infirmities of age do not advance till several years after.



Fancying we have certain diseases will sometimes bring them upon us:

the reach of sickness; nor neglect the care which may conquer, in its

eating, will shew the first; and the latter may be known best by the
That old person’s digestion is always good, who has a sharp but not
at every meal: to keep the stomach in order, do not overload it.
up; and before breakfast. It should be a rule never to omit this
of the health.
mechanical: a repeated attention in the plain way is better.
pulse in health; and all deviations from this shew or threaten sickness.
and with a mind at ease can take his usual exercise freely, he may be

will prevent half the diseases of mankind.



lean, of stranguries: both should be guarded against with extreme care;

all that has been written of Burdock root, I may add here, that if as
Peter Collinson. Mr. Josiah Soames, near dying the same way, was saved
Exercise has thro’ the younger part of life been very instrumental
motion, which will overload when quiet: that will nourish while we walk
We must not make a change of diet violently; for all sudden alterations

affects them. They will perceive the cold has hurt them, when they find

quantity than usual. In this case let flannel be put on carefully: this
left off again.
quantity: and flannel will diminish one as much as it encreases another.
use of flannel unadvisedly will sometimes occasion this.
many things are excellent when properly used; which may otherwise be
If the appetite fail; or wind oppress the stomach after meals; then

in summer, and grows more spirited and free from his complaints as
hurtfully, and are best in winter.



Beef and pork should be avoided: for the stomach will rarely be able to
Lamb, veal, pig, chickens, rabbets, and fish, are excellent; and out

have been light: otherwise the load of one meal not being gone off
Dinner should not be eaten too early; that the appetite may not be
of it, Cornaro lived to his extreme age.
agree with those who advise the omitting that meal intirely. Moderation
people those are, who, in avoiding a fault, rush into its contrary.
which are partly composed of milk are best for him.
ready digested. He wants an easy nourishment; and this affords it;
Asses milk is most easy of digestion: a pint of that, with a small
the cow is richer and heavier. Those who use the latter in the country,

need not be denied. Weak broths of veal, chicken, and mutton, may be


at that time, is the less able to digest a dinner. This is the reason
just so much desire to eat, as will lead them to get a little into the
Men may fast away their appetite; and their power of digestion goes

disturbs its office. It should be constantly kept at its due employment

chocolate, not made too strong, is a good breakfast. Coffee I cannot

pound, and make it well; taking care the water boils, and allowing so

with it a thin slice or two of good bread, with a little butter: and he
The virtues of tea thus drank are as considerable, as its bad
loading it: the appetite for dinner will be the better for it; and the
more than any other liquid.
better than table-beer; because it will keep to a due time for safe use.
and former manner of life, more may be born by some without

for breakfast. When the stomach cannot digest solids, these liquid
’tis an idle fancy: I have found, on repeated trials, broth of veal,

                               CHAP. IV.

vegetables may be thought innocent; too much of them will in some cases


complaint, the gravel.
too much butter: but very fine Cheshire cheese; or the Parmezan in a
All sharp-tasted things, whether in food or drink, are carefully to

dangerous cholics.
necessary secretions.
dangerous: its sharpness fleas the mouth; and we know what effect such
are several kinds of this fruit; somewhat differing in quality; and a
he does of mushrooms: where many are dangerous; avoid all.
advanced in years would be upon their guard against all such as they
Particular constitutions will shew unforeseen aversions to peculiar
and ’tis idle to run into the way of danger, where there is no
All mixtures of food upon the stomach are bad: and there is not a
two things of known qualities will often, on mixing, produce a third

food; and fixing on a right quantity.



at any time to chuse that kind.
air has neither of these characters; where we breathe smoke, and the

and ten in London, think of leaving it, as a way to continue his days
accustomed, are often better than sudden changes. It is well known,
scarce of less consequence.
his days by a country air, should begin at an earlier time: when his
In regard to a choice of air, the reason we declare against that which
This sharp air is natural at the tops of hills: and such situations all
On the contrary, the mildest air of the country is that of vallies;

part rise to a very great height: and if there be a running water at
More than this should be consulted for the country residence of the
because it is always cold; and the air about it consequently raw,
moisture.
warm, and naturally dry; for rain soaks through it.
them shelter themselves from these by a proper choice of situation. Let
quarters. This may be assisted also by plantations of trees: and thus

residence is chosen, the more carefully and gradually must the owner
all the great articles of health which age wants; appetite, digestion,
Exercise will be easy; and it will be always pleasant in such a spot:
rash and careless indulgence in this point, than it can do him service.
good; nor venture upon the ground but when it is fit for his feet.
a good smooth gravel walk. Let this be open to the south-west, and well
even.
in such as is not so fair, this garden-walk will be highly useful: but

constantly on such a walk, will add many years to life; and what is

                               CHAP. VI.

walking; and for those who have strength to indulge themselves in this,

as for the other. In severe weather it will be necessary to ride under
Many diversions afford also excellent exercise: bowling is one: but the
A chariot may supply the place of a horse, to such as are more feeble;
which are made to run upon gravel walks.
constant exercise. We do not mean that they should dig, or weed the

fruit upon the trees; and the following and overlooking the other
of the hands will complete that exercise, by continuing it perfectly
The only danger in this healthy and happy course, is, that it is too
keep him there too late.



of those kinds we have named to such as are most able to take them.
The adjusting an escritoire; or the new arranging the volumes in a
house, all answer the same purpose.
best weather, the great relief is a flesh-brush; and the effects
the greatest of its advantages is the assisting circulation. The
and frequently repeated.
warm water, and then rubbing it very well with repeated dry cloths.
the effect of the flesh-brush. The warmth and moisture join also in

be ready immediately; that the person may go into it while he is yet
The hands and feet should have their full share in this washing and
purpose; and will be spoken of hereafter: but that is rather to be used


           _Of a regulation of temper; and of the passions._
Without entering into the province of the moralist or preacher, we may
affected and altered by them: and the nerves may suffer yet more. The
giving full scope to them.
themselves by giving way to immoderate passions. Life is the greatest

in grief, faint, and slow; terrors make it irregular; and shame impedes
These are sure notices of a disordered circulation: and old men cannot
is weak, and cannot. Philosophy teaches the governing our passions;
in every respect are his business: and as he is past the fluttering
Good humour, and a happy satisfaction of mind, will give the aged many

appetite decays with the power: but if he will solicit that which he
poor remainder he allows, of peace; he will be only making himself the
In passionate people, what we blame as their fault, is often their
these, there are a hundred whose fury of temper is owing to a disorder
We know madness is a disease: and violent passion is a temporary

tyranny. Let him examine himself, whether it be a disorder of his
restore him to temper; to that temper on which his life and happiness
Let the hasty old man cool himself by physic and a low diet: and let

long before his time.
be avoided. The blood and the nerves are disordered by this much more
storms of the mind leave a swelling sea, which strength of body alone
No disease is more mischievous to weak old persons than a purging: and
flux which would have been stop’d, if natural, by a spoonful of chalk

on by lesser fears.
or outrageous degree, as hurtful as the other passions: it hurries the
of youth; it belongs to that period of life more properly: that can

covetousness. ’Tis known universally, and we have sacred attestation of
and the care of heaping up for others, when it shortens their own life,
Ease and good humour are the great ingredients of a happy life: and
little all the accidents which belong to it, that he do not give a vain

                               CHAP. IX.

young world; but this needs not, nor should influence those in years.

may now add, that after a light and early supper, and an hour of social

because they can least bear the waste of them. The passions will
safely indulge in it longer than the young.
in age, eight, or even ten, according to the peculiar constitution, may
The natural season of sleep is night; and let the old man therefore
age, is to go to bed at ten; and rise at eight in the morning.
cannot compose himself to rest soon after going to bed; or get so
sleep: let him go into a warm bath; and indulge himself with a glass of
slumber.
for want of sleep at night, is every way extremely wrong. As nothing
consequence from it, that the person is never sleepy, at the due time
conquer’d, and the more hurtful.
regularly at ten o’clock, will naturally wake towards eight. And when
will then be low spirited during the whole following day; and waking
On these little circumstances do the health or sickness, the happiness
future more careful. There is no pain in living regularly in old age;


         _Of the particular faults in old mens constitutions._
I hope it will be easy, by the preceding and the following directions,
Hippocrates, who knew physic better than all who have followed him,
lectur’d for ever publicly on the simplicity and ease of physic.
him will result from it; then he may keep his mind at peace, which is
their apparent effects.
who are healthy: and the rules we have laid down are for preserving and


but if he fall into them, whether by neglect of these cautions, or in
We can advise him how to preserve health when he has it; and how to
frame, who will pretend to remedy its diseases without a knowledge both
to teach some other art by writing; and as rational to attempt making
qualifies him for the undertaking: how then should a few light words

                               CHAP. XI.

humours: for as they are separated from the blood, they naturally

than it should; his complexion will be more florid; and his urine

prevent the mischief which they threaten, is by more motion; and an
This is plainly the change which should be made: but it must not
and regularly brought on. If therefore no disease be come on as yet
in a satisfactory manner; whereas she would have been too violently
The first rule is to retrench one third part from the flesh eaten at
very rarely eaten; and the dinner being made solely of the tender and
meat almost raw, and doctors have advis’d it; but they would be better
Let the person rise an hour before his usual time in a morning; and
cold. In getting rid of one evil, let us not run into another. This
to people in this condition, and therefore are very carefully to be
The pulse will shew whether or not this method reduces the redundance
complete the business; and there will be no need for medicines.
will probably answer the purpose. In all old mens cases ’tis best to


                        _Of wasting and decay._
When old persons fall into this declining condition, it generally
able to digest any thing, there is hope of recovery: but when its power
When an aged person perceives his flesh wasting, and his strength and

hasten his death by such a conduct.
and these only in moderate quantities: chicken, young lamb, and veal,

him take the same again one hour after his light dinner.
asses milk, and a quarter of an ounce of conserve of roses: and his
Every afternoon let him take half a pint of asses milk alone: and
very hurtful. Let him therefore rise early: and to complete the cure,



                       _Against sharp humours._
The first sign of sharp humours, in the bodies of old persons, usually
feverish disposition.
diet has been the cause; particularly high sauces, bad wines, and spicy
constitution utterly. Incurable fevers; or fatal purgings, follow.
of the mild and cooling kind. Every morning let the person take two
let his drink be a tea, made of marshmallow and liquorice-root, with
three days will be needful. The best method of taking it is by chewing.
the rest must be done by a proper regimen.
disorder more than the most improper foods. Let him also banish fear:
He must never overload his stomach; nor must never suffer it to be
prepared at home: for cheating is so easy, and the method with

on again by additional warmth: by flannel socks and yarn stockings.
will assist the other methods.
methods of relief take place; and this promises a cure. To complete it,
avoid care and uneasiness of mind.
diacodium every night.
preserved with a due care afterwards; else relapses in this case are
constitution.
easily conquered; but long established ones are too obstinate for such

                              CHAP. XIV.

one with the other. We need not tell the old man when he is in pain:
This he will know to be the case by his pulse beating hard and quick;
patience, are the remedies: they must be considered as the lot of age,


be given, they increase the violent motion of the blood, and therefore
every morning.
the first four or five days, and in their place asses milk should be

old men, should be introduced. But this must be done gradually, and
inflammation.



these discharges.
in time. A purging will be cured by proper diet, when it is regarded

comfry root, two ounces of each boiled in two quarts of water to three

before bed-time. Sea-biscuit should on this occasion be eat instead of


                      _Of the gravel and stone._
Old persons are very subject to obstructions in the urinary passages;
constitutions.
wine; and supply its place by clear malt liquor, of a due strength.
golden rule is moderation. Violent motion, or rest for a long time
him use the same exercise in his chamber.
effectual medicine. Two ounces of manna should be dissolved in half a
pain, stop the vomitings which usually attend these complaints; and at

and most effectual remedy. Two ounces of the fresh root, with a pint
again, with a quarter of a pint of milk, and sweetened with honey, is
This is the medicine lately published also for the gout; and which many
effectual also in this case. The wonder is, that a plant of so great

this work: and it has been considered separately in that treatise.



this which is natural and necessary, weakness is sometimes accidental,
Great evacuations, intense study, violent passions, or a too low diet,

is known: the remedies are cordial medicines, and a somewhat richer
The medicine I have found most effectual is this: a quarter of an ounce
be poured off, and half a wine-glass of it drank once a day.
toward the cure. Let not the patient think he is in danger: let him

time, let him immediately go into the country: if he be too loose in

agreeable friends will be the best medicine in an evening: and good

                             CHAP. XVIII.

troublesome. ’Tis difficult of cure; but some relief is easy: and


asthma should live near tanners in the country, nor tallow chandlers,
Exercise at proper times is highly beneficial in this case. Walking or
Frequent washing the feet in warm water, and good rubbing with dry
All cold and viscous foods must be avoided. The stomach must not be
and to assist digestion, two or three dishes of good green tea, made


it will require to be soon repeated.
and the same condition of it shews that the body can spare those

dissolved in half a pint of water, two spoonfuls should be taken,
This method will prevent many fits, and abate the severity of those
Thus the old man, even against the fury of this worst disturbance
discretion.






  Diet, 12
  Exercise, 24
  Fluxes, 47

  Fulness of blood, 38
  Gravel, 48
  Health, 7



  Passions, 28
  Situation, 20

  Stone, 48
  Temper, 28
  Wasting, 41




so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
license, especially commercial redistribution.


(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
www.gutenberg.org/license.
Gutenberg™ electronic works
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
1.E.8.
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
you share it without charge with others.
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  you are located before using this eBook.
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or

must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™

prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with

any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain

unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  receipt of the work.
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
1.F.
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If

OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
from people in all walks of life.
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see


state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Literary Archive Foundation
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations

States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND

against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
volunteer support.
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
edition.
facility: www.gutenberg.org
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
