longer life, by John Hill
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
Title: The old man's guide to health and longer life

Produced by: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
AND LONGER LIFE ***


                                  TO


                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE:

                                  AND
                           BY J. HILL, M. D.
                           THE SIXTH EDITION,
              Printed for E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.


freed from the empire of the passions, they enjoy quiet.

be avoided, and those disorders timely obviated.

which they owe their birth.
years, in different constitutions: I could at this hour point out a
Infirmities of age do not advance till several years after.
                               CHAP. I.
It is allowed, we know so little of nothing, as of ourselves: it has

ready to acknowledge real disorders; as careful to avoid imaginary.
pulse.
at every meal: to keep the stomach in order, do not overload it.
its slightest variations; and when any such happen, let care be taken

and with a mind at ease can take his usual exercise freely, he may be
slow, and weak, the food must be somewhat richer. This short direction


that might have been prevented easily by a timely care.
much had been known of its virtues but a little while ago, as is now
Exercise has thro’ the younger part of life been very instrumental

Old men are least healthy in winter: therefore they should then be

due colour, and quantity. And after that let the flannel be carefully

many things are excellent when properly used; which may otherwise be
hurts digestion.
that period advances toward autumn: winter we have said hurts age, for


digest these, when it is not assisted by good exercise.



people those are, who, in avoiding a fault, rush into its contrary.
The digestive faculties in an old man are weak; but milk is in a manner
toast, eaten two hours before bed-time, will be nourishing; and sit

and wholesome.
The breakfast is not very important. Those who eat no supper are too
just so much desire to eat, as will lead them to get a little into the
a point not enough regarded.
in advanced periods of life; and this by small quantities of proper
chocolate, not made too strong, is a good breakfast. Coffee I cannot
breakfast. Let him use the plain green sort of sixteen shillings a
Let him drink three moderate cups, with a little sugar and a good deal
The virtues of tea thus drank are as considerable, as its bad
also for the great purpose of diluting; and it refreshes the spirits


are wanted, a broth breakfast is excellent. Vipers are extolled, but


entirely.
Salads should be shunned: cabbage, and all its kinds, breed wind; but
too much butter: but very fine Cheshire cheese; or the Parmezan in a
more likely to do harm than good.

dangerous: its sharpness fleas the mouth; and we know what effect such
effects: but these are nice distinctions: he who is wise will judge as
are not accustomed to.
and ’tis idle to run into the way of danger, where there is no
He must not deceive himself by arguing that they all are innocent: for
Right management in these articles is nearly as important as a right




nature itself: and bad things, to which an old man has been very long

In regard to a choice of air, the reason we declare against that which

The choice rests solely then upon a gentle ascent: the best place of
More than this should be consulted for the country residence of the
evaporated; chilling the ground, and loading the air with their fatal

quarters. This may be assisted also by plantations of trees: and thus
who finds himself now in good time to make it. The later such a
and a free circulation.
rash and careless indulgence in this point, than it can do him service.
No country house is without a garden; and the best part of this will be




walking; and for those who have strength to indulge themselves in this,
fittest hours of the day must be chosen for that, in the same manner
