
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
       With rules for diet, exercise, and physic; for preserving a good
Release Date: February 12, 2023 [eBook #70024]
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images

                            [Illustration]
                                  THE


                            OLD MAN’s GUIDE

                                  FOR







A hundred are cut off by disorders which a regular course of life might

Moderate diet, and due exercise, are the best guardians of health in

very young man of eighty-seven: and the purlieus of Covent-Garden


been said often of the mind; but it is not less true of the body.
To avoid both, let the elderly man read here, with a free mind. Let him



of the health.
A frequent examination will inform us what is the condition of our
certain he is well. We shall tell him how to keep so: and when a fault
will prevent half the diseases of mankind.
                               CHAP. II.
The diseases of aged persons differ, according to their state of body,

notorious, we might some years longer have enjoyed that excellent man
in preserving health: when we grow old we cannot use so much; and we
We must not make a change of diet violently; for all sudden alterations
most careful. They are colder than the young; and therefore cold more
If perspiration has been stop’d by the cold, and no other ill effect
left off again.
No disorder is more troublesome to old men than costiveness: and the
destructive.

age is cold and dry; and for that very reason youth feel summer most



No aged person should eat more than one considerable meal of solid food
Dinner should not be eaten too early; that the appetite may not be
With respect to supper, the lighter it is the better: though we do not
There is a medium sure between a heavy supper, and emptiness; and that
ready digested. He wants an easy nourishment; and this affords it;
easy on the stomach. The value of asses milk is its lightness: that of
There are many other methods in which milk is proper: milk pottage, and

hungry in a morning; and the stomach being loaded with what they take
stomach without loading it.

food.
advise generally: but the exceptions against tea are in a great measure
pound, and make it well; taking care the water boils, and allowing so
of milk; and take it neither too hot, nor mawkishly cool. Let him eat
qualities when ill managed. In this manner, it strengthens the stomach,
more than any other liquid.
Some wine is necessary to old men: and according to the constitution,
As occasion shall require, the supper foods here directed may be
’tis an idle fancy: I have found, on repeated trials, broth of veal,



asparagus is diuretic; and is excellent against that common old man’s
small quantity after other food, are not amiss.

Cucumbers weaken the digestion; and greatly prevent the natural and
a thing must have upon the stomach and bowels, when weakened by age.
he does of mushrooms: where many are dangerous; avoid all.

advantage.
two things of known qualities will often, on mixing, produce a third
choice. A regularity of eating is the next care to the selecting proper


It is strange so many should live to a great age in London, where the
But though none will question the superior excellence of a clear
accustomed, are often better than sudden changes. It is well known,
He who would extend the period, and encrease the healthy condition of
is too bleak is plain; for bleak and cold are always found together.
On the contrary, the mildest air of the country is that of vallies;
all is toward the bottom of a piece of ground, which does not in any
aged man, or of any who would live to be aged. The soil is of vast
moisture.
The north and north-east winds are the worst for old men: therefore let
the true seat of health and pleasure may be established; so far as
residence is chosen, the more carefully and gradually must the owner


a good smooth gravel walk. Let this be open to the south-west, and well
In very favourable weather he may walk in pathways in the fields: but
The air of early morning and of late evening are both cold and

                      _Of exercise for old men._
there is none better: but feeble limbs, and various accidents, often
as for the other. In severe weather it will be necessary to ride under
