This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
       constitution, and preventing disorders in a bad one

             generously made available by The Internet Archive)



                        HEALTH and LONGER LIFE.


                             WITH RULES FOR

                   Preventing DISORDERS in a bad one.
                    MEMBER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY.
                        CORRECTED AND ENLARGED.
                              M.DCC.LXXI.
                                  THE
Healthful old age is the most valuable period of human life: Experience
Philosophy pretends to this condition; but age gives it truly: Whatever
prevent; for one who dies of age, or its unavoidable effects: Many fall
Old mens diseases are hard to cure; but they are easy to prevent. It
all: but in the advanced period here considered there are two great
It may be expected, I should now say, at what period of Life the state
abound with very old men at seven-and-twenty: but to speak in general

          _How a person in Years is to know he is in Health._
Fancying we have certain diseases will sometimes bring them upon us:
not suppose, because God has blessed him with long health, he is above
Health consists in a good digestion of the food; and free circulation
That old person’s digestion is always good, who has a sharp but not
The best time to feel the pulse is in a morning: a little after getting

pulse in health; and all deviations from this shew or threaten sickness.
is seen in time, ’tis easily remedy’d.


and natural constitution: the corpulent, are in danger of asthmas; the
That care, and all the necessary help, will be shewn in a separate
Peter Collinson. Mr. Josiah Soames, near dying the same way, was saved
must therefore be more careful in our food. That will go off well with
are dangerous. Our strength for exercise will leave us by degrees; and
affects them. They will perceive the cold has hurt them, when they find
follow, that will be seen by the urine being paler, and more in

use of flannel unadvisedly will sometimes occasion this.

The different seasons affect persons in years very greatly, and they
hurtfully, and are best in winter.
                              CHAP. III.
Light diet is most proper for aged persons.
Lamb, veal, pig, chickens, rabbets, and fish, are excellent; and out
in the day. The stomach will manage a dinner when breakfast and supper
violent for supper: The older we grow, the more our food should be
agree with those who advise the omitting that meal intirely. Moderation
is best. Let the old man eat liquids; and of all liquid diets, those
without loading the stomach, or oppressing it during the hours of rest.
the cow is richer and heavier. Those who use the latter in the country,
thin rice milk, will give a change. But some farther pleasing variety
These things will answer the two purposes of nourishing, and
at that time, is the less able to digest a dinner. This is the reason

It is as essential not to keep the stomach empty, as it is not to

groundless.
much tea that it may be of sufficient strength, without standing too
with it a thin slice or two of good bread, with a little butter: and he
and assists digestion: it keeps the body from emptiness, without

and former manner of life, more may be born by some without
used by way of dinner; and broths may even be necessary sometimes
and chickens, is much better.
                               CHAP. IV.
Every thing that is heavy, and hard of digestion, must be avoided. Tho’
Carrots are to be avoided, no weak stomach can digest them: turnips are
complaint, the gravel.

Fruits of a due ripeness, are innocent; and much more good than this
necessary secretions.
I have known it bring on bloody fluxes, which have been fatal. There

Particular constitutions will shew unforeseen aversions to peculiar

that is perfectly different from them both: and these are dangerous
food; and fixing on a right quantity.
                               CHAP. V.
Nothing contributes more to health and long life than pure and good
air has neither of these characters; where we breathe smoke, and the
country air, yet let not him who has attained to a healthy three-score
that many who have reached an uncommon date of life, have perished at
his days by a country air, should begin at an earlier time: when his
Cold air chills the blood; and in old men we want rather to warm it.
sheltered by rising grounds: but this is usually damp; and more
part rise to a very great height: and if there be a running water at
consequence; and so is the exposure. A clayey bottom must be avoided;

them shelter themselves from these by a proper choice of situation. Let
these great points concern them.
accustom himself to it: first in summer; and by degrees; and at times,
Exercise will be easy; and it will be always pleasant in such a spot:
Let him never enjoy the air but when it is in a condition to do him
defended from the dangerous quarters. Let it be laid tolerably round,
in such as is not so fair, this garden-walk will be highly useful: but
unwholesome; but some hours of the foremost part of the day, passed


deny its use to those who most of all want motion.
shelter; and at all times to avoid damp or bleak places.